title,abstract
Irbesartan Reduces QT Dispersion in Hypertensive Individuals,"Abstract —Angiotensin type 1 receptor antagonists have direct effects on the autonomic nervous system and myocardium. Because of this, we hypothesized that irbesartan would reduce QT dispersion to a greater degree than amlodipine, a highly selective vasodilator. To test this, we gathered electrocardiographic (ECG) data from a multinational, multicenter, randomized, double-blind parallel group study that compared the antihypertensive efficacy of irbesartan and amlodipine in elderly subjects with mild to moderate hypertension. Subjects were treated for 6 months with either drug. Hydrochlorothiazide and atenolol were added after 12 weeks if blood pressure (BP) remained uncontrolled. ECGs were obtained before randomization and at 6 months. A total of 188 subjects (118 with baseline ECGs) were randomized. We analyzed 104 subjects who had complete ECGs at baseline and after 6 months of treatment. Baseline characteristics between treatments were similar, apart from a slight imbalance in diastolic BP (irbesartan [n=53] versus amlodipine [n=51], 99.2 [SD 3.6] versus 100.8 [3.8] mm Hg; P =0.03). There were no significant differences in BP normalization (diastolic BP &lt;90 mm Hg) between treatments at 6 months (irbesartan versus amlodipine, 80% versus 88%; P =0.378). We found a significant reduction in QT indexes in the irbesartan group (QTc dispersion mean, –11.4 [34.5] milliseconds, P =0.02; QTc max, –12.8 [35.5] milliseconds, P =0.01), and QTc dispersion did not correlate with the change in BP. The reduction in QT indexes with amlodipine (QTc dispersion, –9.7 [35.4] milliseconds, P =0.06; QTc max, –8.6 [33.2] milliseconds, P =0.07) did not quite reach statistical significance, but there was a correlation between the change in QT indexes and changes in systolic BP. In conclusion, irbesartan improved QT dispersion, and this effect may be important in preventing sudden cardiac death in at-risk hypertensive subjects."
Prevalence of Gingival Overgrowth Induced by Calcium Channel Blockers: A Community‐Based Study,"Background: The prevalence of gingival overgrowth induced by chronic medication with calcium channel blockers is uncertain. Although there have been several studies examining this question, the results are conflicting, with previous estimates ranging from 20% to 83%. There have been only 2 studies examining the prevalence of overgrowth induced by diltiazem and amlodipine, with estimates of 74% and 3.3%, respectively.Methods: The current study aimed to address the problems associated with these studies by examining a sample of patients taking one of 3 calcium channel blockers, who were drawn from a community‐based population in northeastern England. Nine hundred eleven (911) subjects were recruited from general medical practices in the area. Of these, 442 were taking nifedipine, 181 amlodipine, and 186 diltiazem. In addition, 102 control subjects were examined. Drug and demographic data for each subject were recorded. The periodontal condition of all subjects was assessed including plaque index, papillary bleeding index, and a photograph of the anterior gingivae for subsequent analysis of overgrowth severity.Results: More than six percent (6.3%) of subjects taking nifedipine were seen to have significant overgrowth. This overgrowth was statistically greater than the amount of overgrowth seen in either of the other 2 drug groups or the control population. The prevalence of gingival overgrowth induced by amlodipine or diltiazem was not statistically significant when compared to the control group. The severity of overgrowth within the nifedipine group was found to be related to the amount of gingival inflammation and also to the gender of the subject, with males being 3 times as likely to develop overgrowth than females.Conclusions: The prevalence of clinically significant overgrowth related to chronic medication with calcium channel blockers is low, i.e., 6.3% for nifedipine. Males are 3 times as likely as females to develop clinically significant overgrowth. The presence of gingival inflammation is an important cofactor for the expression of this effect."
Effects of Long‐Acting Versus Short‐Acting Calcium Channel Blockers Among Older Survivors of Acute Myocardial Infarction,"OBJECTIVE: Recent studies have highlighted the potentially harmful effects of short‐acting calcium channel blockers, especially of the dihydropyridine type, in patients with coronary heart disease. Some have argued that long‐acting calcium channel blockers are safer, but few outcome data exist. The objective of the study was to compare the occurrence of adverse outcomes among recipients of long‐acting versus short‐acting calcium channel blockers, with dihydropyridines and non‐dihydropyridines compared separately.SETTING: The New Jersey Medicare population.DESIGN: A retrospective cohort study using linked Medicare and drug claims data.PARTICIPANTS: Older survivors of acute myocardial infarction (MI) occurring in 1989 and 1990. Eligible subjects had survived at least 30 days after the MI, participated in Medicare and a drug benefits program, and were prescribed a single type of either a long‐acting or a short‐acting calcium channel blocker within 90 days after the MI.MEASUREMENTS: The two outcome measures were rates of all‐cause mortality and cardiac rehospitalization. Using separate Cox regression models for dihydropyridines (nifedipine, nicardipine) and non‐dihydropyridines (diltiazem, verapamil), we examined these outcomes for recipients of long‐acting compared with short‐acting calcium channel blockers.RESULTS: Of the 833 patients eligible for the study, 160 were prescribed long‐acting and 673 short‐acting calcium channel blockers. Clinical characteristics of long‐acting and short‐acting users were comparable. During 2 years of follow‐up, 221 deaths and 300 rehospitalizations occurred. Controlling for age, sex, race, and indicators of disease severity and comorbidity, the relative risk of dying for recipients of long‐acting, compared with short‐acting, dihydropyridines was .42 (95% confidence interval (CI), 0.21‐0.86). For cardiac rehospitalization, the relative risk was 0.57 (95% CI, 0.34‐0.94). For the long‐acting versus short‐acting non‐dihydropyridines, the adjusted relative risk of dying was 1.43 (95% CI, 0.88‐2.32), and for cardiac rehospitalization, .65 (95% CI, 0.40‐1.05).CONCLUSION: Use of long‐acting dihydropyridine calcium channel blockers after acute MI was associated with substantially lower rates of cardiac rehospitalization and death compared with use of their short‐acting counterparts. More data are needed to address the possibility that long‐acting, compared with short‐acting, non‐dihydropyridines could decrease rehospitalization rates but increase mortality."
Retrospective analysis of the frequency and recognition of adverse drug reactions by means of automatically recorded laboratory signals,Aims To estimate the frequency of adverse drug reactions (ADRs) identified through the use of automatic signals generated from laboratory data (ALS) in hospitalised patients. To determine the frequency of spontaneous recognition of these ADRs by the attending physicians and to assess the potential value of ALS for detection of ADRs. Methods Laboratory results of patients hospitalised in a nine bed medical ward were automatically recorded over a period of 17 months. Values exceeding defined boundaries were used as ALS. Charts of every third patient were analysed retrospectively with regard to adverse drug related reactions and causality was evaluated as well as whether the ADR had been recognised during the period of hospitalisation. Results The charts and ALS of 98 patients were analysed. In 18 cases a drug‐related adverse reaction was probable. Awareness to the reaction by the treating physicians was evident in 6 out of these 18 ADRs. Approximately 80% of the ADRs were considered predictable. Three ADRs were regarded as serious. Conclusions Adverse drug reactions are common and often preventable. Only one third of ADRs which could have been detected through ALS were recognised by the attending physicians. An increased doctor’s awareness of the frequency of drug related abnormal laboratory results by means of ALS is likely to increase the recognition rate of ADRs and might help to prevent them.
"Cohort study on calcium channel blockers, other cardiovascular agents, and the prevalence of depression","Aims Some reports have suggested that calcium channel blockers may be associated with an increased incidence of depression or suicide. There is a paucity of evidence from large scale studies. The aim of this study was to assess rates of depression with calcium channel antagonists using data from prescription event monitoring studies. Methods Observational studies on large cohorts of patients using lisinopril, enalapril (ACE inhibitors), nicardipine (type 2 calcium channel blocker) and diltiazem (type 3 calcium channel blocker) were conducted, using prescription‐event monitoring. Rates of depression in the different drugs and rate ratios (95% CI) were computed. Results The crude overall rates of depression during treatment were 1.89, 1.92 and 1.62 per 1000 patient months for the ACE inhibitors, diltiazem and nicardipine, respectively. Using the ACE inhibitors as the reference group, the rate ratios for depression were 1.07 (0.82–1.40) and 0.86 (0.69–1.08) for diltiazem and nicardipine, respectively. Conclusions This study does not support the hypothesis that calcium channel blockers are associated with depression, when considering patients treated in general practice in the UK."
Effect of amlodipine on exercise‐induced platelet activation in patients affected by chronic stable angina,"AbstractBackground: Literature concerning exercise‐induced platelet activation in chronic stable angina is somewhat confusing. The reason lies in the type of exercise as well as in methodological problems. A powerful, recently introduced procedure to detect platelet activation is flow cytometry. Platelet response to activating factors is mediated by calcium uptake; however, calcium antagonist effect on platelet activity is still unclear.Hypothesis: The study was undertaken to investigate exercise‐induced platelet activation before and after treatment with amlodipine in chronic stable angina.Methods: Twenty patients with chronic stable angina were entered into the study. Each subject underwent a symptom‐limited cycloergometer stress test following a washout period of 2 weeks. Blood samples were collected before and immediately after exercise. All subjects were then randomized into two groups of 10 patients each, with Group 1 and Group 2 taking amlodipine 10 mg/day, and placebo for 4 weeks, respectively. They subsequently underwent a second exercise stress test, and blood samples were obtained before and immediately after exercise. Flow‐cytometric evaluation of platelet activity was performed in order to recognize GMP‐140 expression on platelet membrane.Results: Strenuous exercise induced a significant increase in platelet activation in all subjects prior to therapy. No significant differences were observed in platelet activity at rest between Groups 1 and 2, whereas a significant decrease in exercise‐induced platelet activation was demonstrated in Group 1 compared with Group 2.Conclusion: Our data provide evidence of the favorable effect of amlodipine on exercise‐induced platelet activation in patients affected by chronic stable angina."
Initiation of Atrial Fibrillation by Ectopic Beats Originating From the Pulmonary Veins,"Background —Atrial fibrillation (AF) can be initiated by ectopic beats originating from the atrial or great venous tissues. This study investigated the anatomic characteristics and electrophysiological properties of pulmonary veins (PVs), as well as the possible mechanisms and response to drugs of ectopic foci, and assessed the effects of radiofrequency (RF) ablation on AF initiated by ectopic beats originating from PVs. Methods and Results —Seventy-nine patients with frequent episodes of paroxysmal AF and 10 control patients were included. Distal PVs showed the shortest effective refractory periods (ERPs), and right superior PVs showed a higher incidence of intra-PV conduction block than left superior PVs. Superior and left PVs had longer myocardial sleeves than inferior and right PVs, respectively. These electrophysiological characteristics were similar between AF and control patients. Propranolol, verapamil, and procainamide suppressed ectopic beats that originated from the PVs. Of 116 ectopic foci that initiated AF, 103 (88.8%) originated from PVs. A mean of 7±3 RF applications completely eliminated 110 ectopic foci (94.8%). During the 6±2-month follow-up period, 68 patients (86.1%) were free of AF without any antiarrhythmic drugs. Follow-up transesophageal echocardiogram showed 42.4% of ablated PVs had focal stenosis. One patient had mild exertional dyspnea after ablation, but it resolved 3 months later; 1 patient had onset of mild exertional dyspnea 5 months after ablation. Conclusions —Electrophysiological characteristics of PVs are different from those in the atria. Ectopic beats from PVs can initiate AF, and β-adrenergic receptor blocker, calcium channel blockers, and sodium channel blockers can suppress these ectopic beats. Careful mapping and elimination of these ectopic foci can cure paroxysmal AF."
Esophageal Motility Disorders: Current Concepts of Pathogenesis and Treatment,"Current concepts of esophageal motility disorders are summarized. Primary data sources were located via MEDLINE or cross-citation. No attempt was made to be comprehensive or inclusive of the literature because fewer than 10% of citations are discussed. Instead, emphasis was placed on new developments in diagnosis, therapeutics, and practice patterns. Controlled therapeutic trials and pathophysiological observations are emphasized. Achalasia is a rare disease of failed lower sphincter relaxation and aperistalsis. Diffuse esophageal spasm (DES), an equally rare disease, is defined by non-propagated esophageal contractions. Nonspecific motility disorders, including nutcracker esophagus and hypertensive lower esophageal sphincter, are identified only by manometry and are ten times as prevalent. Neuromuscular pathology is evident only with achalasia (myenteric plexus neurons destruction). Pharmacological therapies have limited efficacy with achalasia; more limited with DES; and none with the nonspecific motility disorders. More efficacious therapies for the nonspecific disorders are directed at associated reflux disease or psychiatric disorders. Pneumatic dilation is effective therapy for achalasia 72% of instances, but frequently requires repeat dilation and is complicated by a 3% perforation rate. Surgical myotomy is effective in 88% of achalasics; morbidity from thoracotomy has been the major limitation but this has been sharply reduced with a laparoscopic approach. In conclusion, although it has been suggested that esophageal motility disorders are distinct clinical entities, critical review of the literature supports this only in the case of achalasia, a disease of well defined pathophysiology, functional disturbance, and therapies. This clarity diminishes progressively for DES and non-specific esophageal motility disorders."
"Evaluation of amlodipine, lisinopril, and a combination in the treatment of essential hypertension","Abstract Angiotensin converting enzyme (ACE) inhibitors and dihydropyridine calcium antagonists are well established and widely used as monotherapy in patients with mild to moderate essential hypertension. Earlier studies combining short acting drugs from these classes require multiple dosing and were associated with poor compliance. Availability of longer acting compounds allows once daily administration to avoid the inconvenience of a multiple daily dose. It was decided to perform a randomised double blind, crossover study with the long acting calcium channel blocker amlodipine and the long acting ACE inhibitor lisinopril, given either alone or in combination in essential hypertension. Twenty four patients with diastolic blood pressure (DBP) between 95 and 104 mm Hg received amlodipine 2.5 mg and 5 mg, lisinopril 5 mg and 10 mg, and their combination as per a prior randomisation schedule. Supine and standing blood pressure and heart rate were recorded at weekly intervals. Higher doses of both the drugs individually or in combination were used if the target supine DBP below 90 mm Hg was not achieved. There was a significant additional blood pressure lowering effect with the combination when compared either with amlodipine or lisinopril alone. Five mg amlodipine and 10 mg lisinopril monotherapy achieved the target blood pressure in 71% and 72% patients respectively. The combination of 2.5 mg amlodipine with 5 mg lisinopril produced a much more significant lowering of blood pressure in a higher percentage of patients than that with an individual low dose."
