Inhibition of cellular transport processes by 5-thio-<scp>d</scp>-glucopyranose <jats:p>5-Thio-d-glucopyranose
 the nearest analogue of normal d-glucose, which is proving a useful tool in examinations of d-glucose biochemistry, affects active and facilitated-diffusion transport processes.
5-Thio-d-glucose is readily transported in rabbit kidney-cortex slices and reaches a tissue/medium ratio of 6.5 within 40min.
The sulphur analogue shows typical saturation kinetics with a Km value of 2.4mm and Vmax.
value of 70μmol/h per g of cell water.
Uptake of 5-thio-d-glucose is phlorrhizin-sensitive, Na+-dependent and energy-dependent.
d-Galactose and methyl α-d-glucopyranoside transport is competitively inhibited by 5-thio-d-glucose with Ki values of 4.8 and 9.7mm respectively.
5-Thio-d-glucose thus shows all of the characteristics of active transport in kidney cortex.
Transport of neutral amino acids in rat kidney cortex is inhibited by 5-thio-d-glucose.
Thus 5.6mm-5-thio-d-glucose causes a 25–30% inhibition of the transport of glycine and the non-metabolized amino acids cycloleucine and α-aminoisobutyric acid.
5-Thio-d-glucose is freely taken up by the facilitated-diffusion transport system in rat diaphragm muscle.
The sulphur analogue inhibits the transport of d-xylose in this tissue but has no effect on the uptake of d-arabinose.
It is concluded that the ring heteroatom is not an effector of binding in the transport processes examined and causes no important alteration in the conformation of the sugar.
The diabetogenic action produced by 5-thio-d-glucose is due, in part, to the ability of the analogue to interfere with cellular transport processes that use d-glucose.</jats:p>
[Age-related characteristics of structural support for ovarian function]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1984 Dec;98(12):759-61.

[Age-related characteristics of structural support for ovarian function].

[Article in Russian]

Koval'skiĭ GB.

Histoenzymological assay was used to investigate various structures of the 
ovaries of rats of two groups aged 3-4 and 12-14 months during estral cycle. The 
activity of 3 beta-
 17 beta- and 20 alpha-steroid dehydrogenases, 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, NAD and NADP-diaphorases, esterase, acid and 
alkaline phosphatases was studied.
It has been shown that transport alterations 
in the microcirculation including the hematofollicular barrier play, the leading 
part in age-dependent depression of reproductive and endocrine functions.
Ageing 
rats demonstrated no linkage between endothelial, thecal and granular cells, 
which points to the injury of the histophysiological mechanisms of the 
follicular system integration.
PMID: 6542443 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long‐lasting marked inhibition of periaqueductal gray‐evoked defensive behaviors in inescapably‐shocked rats <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Clinical evidence suggests that depression and trauma predispose the subject to panic. Accordingly
 here we examined the late effects of uncontrollable stress, a presumptive model of depression and/or traumatic disorder, on panic‐like behaviors evoked by electrical stimulation of the dorsal periaqueductal gray (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">DPAG</jats:styled-content>).
Changes in anxiety and depression were also assessed in the elevated plus‐maze (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">EPM</jats:styled-content>) and forced‐swimming test (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FST</jats:styled-content>), respectively.
Rats with electrodes in the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">DPAG</jats:styled-content> were subjected to a 7‐day shuttle‐box one‐way escape yoked training with foot‐shocks either escapable (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">ES</jats:styled-content>) or inescapable (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IS</jats:styled-content>).
The day after the end of one‐way escape training, rats were trained in a two‐way escape novel task (test‐session) to ascertain the effectiveness of uncontrollable stress.
<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">DPAG</jats:styled-content> stimulations were carried out in an open field, both before the escape training and 2 and 7 days after it, and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">EPM</jats:styled-content> and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FST</jats:styled-content> were performed on the 8th and 10th days afterwards, respectively.
Controls were either trained with fictive shocks (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FS</jats:styled-content>) or subjected to intracranial stimulations only.
Although the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">ES</jats:styled-content> rats performed significantly better than the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IS</jats:styled-content> group in the two‐way escape task, groups did not differ with respect to either the anxiety or depression scores.
Unexpectedly, however, <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IS</jats:styled-content> rats showed a marked attenuation of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">DPAG</jats:styled-content>‐evoked freezing and flight behaviors relative to both the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">ES</jats:styled-content> and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FS</jats:styled-content> groups, 2 and 7 days after one‐way escape training.
The conjoint inhibition of passive (freezing) and active (flight) defensive behaviors suggests that <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IS</jats:styled-content> inhibits a <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">DPAG</jats:styled-content> in‐built motivational system that may be implicated in depressed patients' difficulties in coping with daily‐life stress.</jats:p>
Glycine attenuates hepatocellular depression during early sepsis and reduces sepsis-induced mortality 1. Crit Care Med. 2001 Jun;29(6):1201-6. doi: 10.1097/00003246-200106000-00024.

Glycine attenuates hepatocellular depression during early sepsis and reduces 
sepsis-induced mortality.

Yang S(1)
 Koo DJ, Chaudry IH, Wang P.

Author information:
(1)Center for Surgical Research and Department of Surgery, University of Alabama 
at Birmingham School of Medicine, Birmingham, AL, USA.
OBJECTIVES: To determine whether administration of glycine, a nonessential amino 
acid, early after the onset of polymicrobial sepsis has any beneficial effects 
on hepatocellular function and the survivability of septic animals and, if so, 
whether the beneficial effects of glycine are associated with down-regulation of 
proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis factor-alpha production.
DESIGN: Prospective, controlled, and randomized animal study.
SETTING: A university research laboratory.
SUBJECTS: Male adult rats were subjected to polymicrobial sepsis by cecal 
ligation and puncture or sham operation followed by the administration of normal 
saline solution.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: At 1 hr after cecal ligation and puncture, 
glycine (0.6 mmol/kg) or vehicle (normal saline solution) was administered 
intravenously over 15 mins.
At 5 hrs after cecal ligation and puncture (i.e., 
early stage of sepsis), hepatocellular function (i.e., the maximal velocity and 
efficiency of in vivo indocyanine green clearance) was determined and hepatocyte 
injury was assessed by measuring plasma concentrations of alpha-gluthathione 
S-transferase.
Serum tumor necrosis factor-alpha was measured by enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assay.
In additional animals, the necrotic cecum was excised at 20 
hrs after cecal ligation and puncture, the peritoneal cavity was irrigated with 
saline, and the midline incision was closed in layers.
Mortality was monitored 
for 10 days thereafter.
The results indicate that hepatocellular function was 
depressed in the early stage of sepsis (i.e., 5 hrs after cecal ligation and 
puncture) as indicated by significant decreases in both maximal velocity and 
transport efficiency of in vivo indocyanine green clearance.
Plasma 
concentrations of alpha-gluthathione S-transferase and tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha were elevated significantly at that interval after cecal ligation 
and puncture.
Administration of glycine 1 hr after cecal ligation and puncture, 
however, increased maximal velocity and maximal efficiency by 60% and 101% (p 
<.05), respectively.
Glycine administration in septic animals decreased 
alpha-gluthathione S-transferase and tumor necrosis factor-alpha by 43% and 80% 
(p <.05).
In addition, glycine treatment decreased the mortality rate from 50% 
to 0% (p <.05) at 10 days after cecal ligation and puncture and cecal excision.
CONCLUSIONS: It appears that the beneficial effect of glycine on hepatocyte 
function and integrity in sepsis may be mediated via down-regulation of tumor 
necrosis factor-alpha.
Because administration of glycine attenuated 
hepatocellular depression and injury during early sepsis and decreased 
sepsis-induced mortality rates, this amino acid appears to be a useful adjunct 
for maintaining cellular functions and preventing lethality from polymicrobial 
sepsis.
DOI: 10.1097/00003246-200106000-00024
PMID: 11395604 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chinese medicine Banxia‐houpu decoction regulates c‐fos expression in the brain regions in chronic mild stress model in rats <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Banxia‐houpu decoction is a safe and effective traditional Chinese medicinal formula used in the treatment of mild and manic‐depressive disorders for centuries. There has been increasing interest in its therapeutic application in depression. However
 the mechanisms behind behavioural changes are still poorly understood.
Chronic mild stress (CMS)‐induced preference behaviour change has been used as a model to predict the clinical efﬁcacy of many types of antidepressant treatment.
Both EtOH and water extracts (AE and WE) of Banxia‐houpu decoction exhibited a signiﬁcantly increased sucrose intake in the CMS model in rats, but there was no effect in unstressed animals.
In the present study, it was found that the c‐fos expression in cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum corpora were very high in the CMS model in rats.
WE and AE at a dose of 130 mg/kg exhibited a signiﬁcantly decreased c‐fos expression in the cerebral regions in CMS model in rats, respectively.
The former was more potent than the latter.
However, no signiﬁcant changes in the c‐fos expression were observed in unstressed rats treated with the decoction.
Fluoxetine not only signiﬁcantly reduced c‐fos expression in all regions in the CMS model in rats, but only showed a marked decrease in c‐fos expression in the hippocampus in unstressed animals.
A different molecular mechanism of Banxia‐houpu decoction and ﬂuoxetine may be implied.
The cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum conpora might be important structural substrates in the central nervous system mediating the section of the Banxia‐houpu decoction on preference behaviour in CMS‐induced rats, and fos protein might be the common substrate of the signal transduction process of the decoction.
Copyright © 2004 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.</jats:p>
Brain monoamine receptors in a chronic unpredictable stress model in rats 1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2001;108(3):311-9. doi: 10.1007/s007020170077.

Brain monoamine receptors in a chronic unpredictable stress model in rats.

Ossowska G(1)
 Nowa G, Kata R, Klenk-Majewska B, Danilczuk Z, Zebrowska-Lupina 
I.
Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacology.
Medical University School, Lublin, 
Poland.
Antidepressant drugs are devoid of mood-elevating effects in normal 
(non-depressed) human subjects, thus, it is necessary to evaluate the 
antidepressant property of compounds (drugs) in animal models of depression.
Several animal models of depression have been introduced, however, only a few 
have been extensively validated.
In the present study we report the results of 
investigations into monoaminergic receptors in the brain of rats subjected to 
chronic unpredictable stress (CUS) procedure (one of the well validated animal 
models of depression).
We have examined the dopaminergic (D-1, D-2), adrenergic 
(alpha-1, beta-1) and serotonergic (5HT-1A, 5HT-2A) receptors in different brain 
regions by a saturation radioligand binding method in rats subjected to CUS 
paradigm and control animals.
CUS procedure resulted in a significant 29% 
increase in the D-1 receptor density in the limbic system and 52% increase of 
the density of 5HT-2A receptors in the cerebral cortex.
The present data 
indicate that the increase of the density of brain D-1 and 5HT-2A receptors of 
rats subjected to CUS might be involved in the pathophysiology of "animal 
depression" (since chronic antidepressant treatment produced opposite changes 
i.e.
decrease in the density of these receptors) and thus in pathophysiology of 
human depression.
DOI: 10.1007/s007020170077
PMID: 11341483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Seasonality of glycogen phosphorylase activity in crucian carp (Carassius carassius L.) 1. J Comp Physiol B. 2011 Oct;181(7):917-26. doi: 10.1007/s00360-011-0580-4. Epub
 2011 Apr 22.

Seasonality of glycogen phosphorylase activity in crucian carp (Carassius 
carassius L.).

Vornanen M(1)
 Haverinen J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Eastern Finland, P.O.
Box 111, 80101, 
Joensuu, Finland.
Matti.Vornanen@uef.fi

Seasonal changes in the activity of glycogen phosphorylase (GP), a rate-limiting 
enzyme of glycogen degradation, were examined in an anoxia-tolerant fish 
species, the crucian carp (Carassius carassius L.).
In muscle and brain, the 
activity of GP remained constant throughout the year when tested at 25°C.
In 
contrast, the activities of liver and heart GP displayed striking increases in 
summer.
When seasonal temperature changes are taken into account, the activity 
of GP during the anoxic mid-winter is only 4-6% of its summer time activity in 
the muscle, heart and liver, and 13% in brain.
In winter-acclimatized fish, 
experimental anoxia (1-6 weeks) caused sustained depression of the GP activity 
in heart and gills.
In liver and muscle, a transient depression of GP activity 
occurred during the first week of anoxia but later GP activity recovered back to 
the normoxic level.
GP of the brain was completely resistant to anoxia.
In all 
studied tissues, the constitutive activity of GP is more than sufficient to 
degrade glycogen deposits during winter anoxia without anoxia-induced activation 
of GP.
The seemingly paradoxical summer-time increase in the activity of liver 
and heart GP could be related to active life-style of the summer-acclimatized 
fish (growth, reproduction), the increased demand of energy and molecular 
precursors of anabolic metabolism being satisfied by preferential degradation of 
glycogen.
The high glycogen content of winter-acclimatized crucian carp is not 
associated with the elevated GP activity or anoxic activation of GP.
DOI: 10.1007/s00360-011-0580-4
PMID: 21512743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Chronic Lead on the Haematology
 Blood Glutathione and Bone Marrow Non‐Haeme Iron of Dogs <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract</jats:bold> Ten clinically normal male beagle dogs were used in the study.
Two dogs served as control, 4 received 2 mg lead/kg daily and 4 received 5 mg lead/kg/daily.
Lead was administered for 13 weeks, after which one‐half of each experimental group was treated with calcium ethylene diaminetetraacetate (CaEDTA) for 5 days.
All animals were then monitored for another 4 weeks.
Blood lead levels, haematology, blood glutathione concentration, and the number of bone marrow cells with stainable iron granules were measured weekly during the 18‐week experimental period.
Clinical signs of poisoning were observed only in one dog in the high dose group after 6 weeks.
The signs included emaciation, anorexia, muscular weakness, evidence of abdominal pain and depression.
These signs were reversed with cessation of lead dosing and CaEDTA treatment.
Blood lead levels and the number of marrow cells with non‐haeme iron increased in both lead‐dosed groups; nucleated red blood cells increased only in high lead dosed group.
There was a trend for an increased packed cell volume in all groups; however, the high lead dosed group did not increase as fast.
No significant changes were observed in blood glutathione concentration and in other haematologic parameters.
There were no differences in the parameters studied between the dogs treated with CaEDTA and those not so treated.
Blood lead levels and the number of nucleated red blood cells decreased after cessation of lead administration and the number of marrow cells with iron also tended to decrease after lead removal.</jats:p>
Effects of Nitrous Oxide on Myocardial Contractility as Evaluated by the Preload Recruitable Stroke Work Relationship in Chronically Instrumented Dogs 1. Anesthesiology. 1990 Dec;73(6):1148-57. doi: 10.1097/00000542-199012000-00013.

Effects of nitrous oxide on myocardial contractility as evaluated by the preload 
recruitable stroke work relationship in chronically instrumented dogs.

Pagel PS(1)
 Kampine JP, Schmeling WT, Warltier DC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Medical College of Wisconsin, Milwaukee 53226.
Assessment of the effects of nitrous oxide on myocardial contractile function in 
vivo has been complicated by lack of a reliable, easily quantified, 
load-independent index of contractility and by the presence of intact autonomic 
nervous system reflexes.
Although several previous investigations in humans and 
experimental animals have demonstrated that nitrous oxide possesses direct 
negative inotropic effects, this conclusion remains controversial.
This 
investigation reexamined the effect of nitrous oxide on myocardial contractile 
function when this agent was combined with baseline isoflurane or sufentanil 
anesthesia in chronically instrumented dogs.
Contractility was evaluated with 
the use of the regional preload recruitable stroke work (PRSW)-end-diastolic 
segment length relationship, a method that provides an accurate, relatively 
afterload-independent assessment of inotropic state in conscious and 
anesthetized dogs.
Because autonomic nervous system tone may influence the 
response of systemic hemodynamics to anesthesia in vivo, experiments were 
performed in the presence of pharmacologic blockade of the autonomic nervous 
system.
Two groups of experiments, consisting of a total of 15 experiments, were 
performed with 12 dogs.
Dogs, chronically instrumented for measurement of 
systemic hemodynamics, including left ventricular pressure and subendocardial 
segment length, were anesthetized with isoflurane or sufentanil.
Thirty percent 
and 70% nitrous oxide were then administered in a random fashion.
Left 
ventricular pressure-segment length loops were generated after 30 min of 
equilibration after each anesthetic intervention with the use of preload 
reduction by partial inferior vena caval constriction, and regional PRSW was 
calculated.
Regional PRSW versus end-diastolic length slope reflected decreases 
in contractile state when nitrous oxide was added to isoflurane (50 +/- 5 for 
isoflurane alone to 28 +/- 2 erg.cm-2 x 10(-3).min-1 with 70% added nitrous 
oxide) or sufentanil (73 +/- 8 for sufentanil alone to 52 +/- 5 erg.cm-2 x 
10(-3).mm-1 with 70% added nitrous oxide).
Similar decreases in left ventricular 
positive dP/dt50 were observed as well, reflecting decreases in contractile 
function.
The results further suggest that the degree of functional depression 
produced by nitrous oxide is nearly equal when isoflurane and sufentanil groups 
are compared.
This study demonstrates that nitrous oxide possesses direct 
negative inotropic actions independent of changes in autonomic nervous system 
tone in the chronically instrumented dog.
DOI: 10.1097/00000542-199012000-00013
PMID: 2147368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Multiple receptors contribute to the behavioral effects of indoleamine hallucinogens 1. Neuropharmacology. 2011 Sep;61(3):364-81. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.01.017.  Epub 2011 Jan 20.

Multiple receptors contribute to the behavioral effects of indoleamine 
hallucinogens.

Halberstadt AL(1)
 Geyer MA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Diego, 9500 Gilman 
Drive, La Jolla, CA 92093, United States.
ahalbers@ucsd.edu

Serotonergic hallucinogens produce profound changes in perception, mood, and 
cognition.
These drugs include phenylalkylamines such as mescaline and 
2,5-dimethoxy-4-methylamphetamine (DOM), and indoleamines such as (+)-lysergic 
acid diethylamide (LSD) and psilocybin.
Despite their differences in chemical 
structure, the two classes of hallucinogens produce remarkably similar 
subjective effects in humans, and induce cross-tolerance.
The phenylalkylamine 
hallucinogens are selective 5-HT(2) receptor agonists, whereas the indoleamines 
are relatively non-selective for serotonin (5-HT) receptors.
There is extensive 
evidence, from both animal and human studies, that the characteristic effects of 
hallucinogens are mediated by interactions with the 5-HT(2A) receptor.
Nevertheless, there is also evidence that interactions with other receptor sites 
contribute to the psychopharmacological and behavioral effects of the 
indoleamine hallucinogens.
This article reviews the evidence demonstrating that 
the effects of indoleamine hallucinogens in a variety of animal behavioral 
paradigms are mediated by both 5-HT(2) and non-5-HT(2) receptors.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.01.017
PMCID: PMC3110631
PMID: 21256140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Novel Migraine Mechanisms as Targets for Therapy 1. Rinsho Shinkeigaku. 2012;52(11):900. doi: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.900.

[Novel migraine mechanisms as targets for therapy].

[Article in Japanese]

Charles A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology
 UCLA School of Medicine.
DOI: 10.5692/clinicalneurol.52.900
PMID: 23196458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A miniature mechanical ventilator for newborn mice <jats:p>Kolandaivelu
 Kumaran, and Chi-Sang Poon.A miniature mechanical ventilator for newborn mice.
J. Appl.
Physiol.
84(2): 733–739, 1998.—Transgenic/knockout mice with predefined mutations have become increasingly popular in biomedical research as models of human diseases.
In some instances, the resulting mutation may cause cardiorespiratory distress in the neonatal or adult animals and may necessitate resuscitation.
Here we describe the design and testing of a miniature and versatile ventilator that can deliver varying ventilatory support modes, including conventional mechanical ventilation and high-frequency ventilation, to animals as small as the newborn mouse.
With a double-piston body chamber design, the device circumvents the problem of air leakage and obviates the need for invasive procedures such as endotracheal intubation, which are particularly important in ventilating small animals.
Preliminary tests on newborn mice as early as postnatal day 0 demonstrated satisfactory restoration of pulmonary ventilation and the prevention of respiratory failure in mutant mice that are prone to respiratory depression.
This device may prove useful in the postnatal management of transgenic/knockout mice with genetically inflicted respiratory disorders.</jats:p>
5-Amino-4-imidazolecarboxaimide riboside raises adenosine in perfused hypoxic rat heart 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1991 Oct 29;204(1):1-7. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(91)90827-d.

5-Amino-4-imidazolecarboxamide riboside raises adenosine in perfused hypoxic rat 
heart.

Oei HH(1)
 Burrier AC, Jeng AY.
Author information:
(1)Research Department, Ciba-Geigy Corporation, Summit, NJ 07901.
The effects of 5-amino-4-imidazolecarboxamide riboside (rAICA) on coronary 
adenosine efflux were examined in blood-free perfused working rat heart 
preparations subjected to mild (70% O2) and severe hypoxia (45% O2).
Under these 
hypoxic conditions, no significant increase of coronary adenosine effluxes was 
observed in the presence of 300 microM rAICA alone.
However, rAICA-induced 
augmentation of coronary adenosine efflux during hypoxia was revealed in the 
presence of an adenosine deaminase inhibitor, erythro-(2-hydroxy-3-nonyl)adenine 
hydrochloride, indicating that the failure to note the increase in coronary 
adenosine efflux was due to a rapid deamination of adenosine to inosine.
A 
depression in heart rate during mild and severe hypoxia was significantly 
exacerbated by rAICA.
These effects on heart rate were mediated by adenosine, 
since they were effectively blocked by 
1,3-dipropyl-8-(2-amino-4-chlorophenyl)xanthine, a selective adenosine 
A1-receptor antagonist.
These results suggest that rAICA elevates adenosine 
efflux during hypoxia.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(91)90827-d
PMID: 1804658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reinterpretation of Crow et al.'s “Electrophysiological correlates of cortical spreading depression” 1. Behav Biol. 1975 Jul;14(3):403-4. doi: 10.1016/s0091-6773(75)90595-7.

Reinterpretation of Crow et al.'s "Electrophysiological correlates of cortical 
spreading depression".

Huston JP.

DOI: 10.1016/s0091-6773(75)90595-7
PMID: 1137554 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of data structure and selection on estimated inbreeding depression in experimental <i>Tribolium castaneum</i> lines <jats:sec><jats:title>Summary</jats:title><jats:p>Inbreeding depression was estimated for four experimental <jats:italic>Tribolium castaneum</jats:italic> lines. Each line
 containing approximately 7000 animals, was selected for 16 generations either randomly (control), on pupae weight (PWT), on family size (FST) or on an index containing both PWT and FST.
The inbreeding trend was 0.9, 0.5, 0.5 and 0.4 % inbreeding per generation in PWT‐selected, FST‐selected, index‐selected, and control line, respectively.
The model used to estimate the inbreeding depression included a linear regression on individual inbreeding coefficients, and random additive genetic effects.
Using all the performance and pedigree data, estimated inbreeding depressions in the control line were —0.13 (SE = 0.16; #) and —8.50 (SE = 2.66; μg) per 1 % inbreeding for FST and PWT, respectively.
Using only performance data of the latest generation in the control line, the estimated inbreeding depressions changed considerably: —0.17 (SE = 0.82) and —37.4 (SE= 11.9) for FST and PWT, respectively.
Estimated inbreeding depression for FST in the FST‐selected line was — 0.40 (SE = 0.31).
Inbreeding depression for PWT in the PWT‐selected line was 21.6 (SE = 25.8).
This study indicates that estimating inbreeding depression might best be based on the performance data of animals with an equal and sufficiently‐large number of ancestral generations known.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Zusammenfassung</jats:title><jats:p><jats:italic>Wirkung von Datenstruktur und Selektion auf geschätzte Inzuchtdepression in experimentellen Triboleum castaneum Linien</jats:italic></jats:p><jats:p>Jede der vier experimentellen Linien, aus je etwa 7000 Individuen, wurde durch 16 Generationen selektiert, zufällig die Kontrolle, auf Puppengewicht (PWT), Familiengröße (FST), oder auf einen beide Merkmale kombinierenden Index.
Inzucntzuwächse in diesen vier Linien waren 0.4, 0.9, 0.5 und 0.5% je Generation.
Das Modell zur Schätzung der Inzuchtdepression beinhaltete eine lineare Regression auf individuelle Inzuchtkoeffizienten und zufällige additive‐genetische Wirkungen.
Aus allen Daten, Leistung und Pedigree, ergaben sich —0.13 (SE = 0.16; #) und — 8.5 (SE = 2.66; mg) je 1% Inzucht für FST und PWT, Daten der letzten Generation ergaben deutlich andere Werte: —0.17 (SE = 0.82) und —37.4 (SE = 11.9) für FST und PWT.
Inzuchtdepressionen für FST bzw.
PWT in den jeweils hierfür selektierten Linien waren —0.40 (SE = 0.31) und 21.6 (SE = 25.8).
Es wird gefolgert, daß Schätzungen auf Leistungen von hinreichend großer Zahl von Vorfahrengenerationen beruhen sollten.</jats:p></jats:sec>
The protective action of zinc against the deleterious effects of cadmium in the regenerating forelimb of the adult newt
 Notophthalmus viridescens.
1.
Growth.
1977 Jun;41(2):95-103.
The protective action of zinc against the deleterious effects of cadmium in the 
regenerating forelimb of the adult newt, Notophthalmus viridescens.
Dixon C, Compher K.

Forelimbs of adult male newts (Notophthalmus viridescens) were amputated and 
immediately dipped in cadmium nitrate for 2 minutes; in addition, some of the 
newts were injected with zinc chloride 24 hours prior to, or 24 hours after 
amputation.
Dipping the amputated forelimb of a newt in a solution of 0.4 M 
cadmium nitrate completely inhibited or retarded regeneration throughout the 65 
days of observation.
Other effects of cadmium administration included erythema 
of the limb, an extensive protrusion of the humerus, and in some cases atypical 
differentiation of regenerates.
When zinc chloride was injected (0.04 mg/g of 
body weight) intraperitoneally into the newt 24 hours prior to limb amputation 
and cadmium dipping, the deleterious effects of cadmium treatment were prevented 
and normal regeneration occurred.
When zinc chloride was administered 24 hours 
after amputation and cadmium dipping, it gave no protection against the cadmium.
It is suggested that cadmium might inhibit regeneration through the inactivation 
of zinc metalloenzymes as a result of an exchange of cadmium for zinc.
Zinc 
chloride administered to newts prior to cadmium treatment may prevent the 
replacement of zinc by cadmium.
PMID: 892583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of betamethasone on circadian and stress‐induced pituitary‐adrenocortical function in the rat <jats:title>Summary</jats:title><jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Both the circadian and stress‐induced changes in plasma corticosterone concentration were abolished by the inclusion of betamethasone in the drinking water of rats.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Adrenal sensitivity to exogenous corticotrophin (ACTH) was unimpaired by the betamethasone treatment.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The normal circadian rhythm in plasma corticosterone returned within 1 day of withdrawal of the steroid
 but the response to stress was normal only after 3 days.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The possible significance of these observations is discussed.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Dietary interactions of lima bean (Phaseolus lunatus) trypsin inhibitor
 haemagglutinin and cyanide Part 2.
Effect on pancreatic and intestinal α‐amylase (EC 3.21.1.1) in growing albino rats <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>A total of 108 growing albino rats was used to evaluate the dietary interactions of the major lima bean antinutritional factors trypsin inhibitor (TI), haemagglutinin (Hgg) and cyanide (CN) with respect to their effects on pancreatic and intestinal α‐amylase activities.
The results indicate that when fed at the same level of activity as found in the raw lima bean (RLB) these factors had no significant <jats:italic>(p</jats:italic> &gt; 0.05) influence on pancreatic α‐amylase activity whether acting individually or in combination.
However, when acting alone, CN appeared to depress pancreatic amylase level more than when interacting with TI or Hgg or both.
Amylase activity was significantly (<jats:italic>p</jats:italic> &lt; 0.01) depressed by the dietary treatments in both the small and large intestine while caecal levels were not.
The most severe depression in amylase activity was elicited by the RLB diet.
The haemagglutinin‐containing diets appeared generally associated with lower levels of intestinal amylase activity.</jats:p><jats:p>From the present finding it is suggested that these factors alone cannot fully account for the magnitude of the depression of intestinal amylase activity which is contingent upon the ingestion of RLB by experimental rats.</jats:p>
Developmental profile of GABA<sub>A</sub>‐mediated synaptic transmission in pyramidal cells of the somatosensory cortex <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Inhibitory synaptic transmission mediated by γ‐aminobutyric acid (GABA)<jats:sub>A</jats:sub> receptors is involved in regulation of experience‐dependent cortical plasticity. However
 little information is available on their presynaptic and postsynaptic developmental profiles.
The present study aims to investigate the developmental changes of miniature and unitary inhibitory postsynaptic currents (mIPSCs and uIPSCs) in mouse barrel cortex.
mIPSCs recorded from supragranular pyramidal neurons showed a gradual increase in frequency during postnatal days 6–15 (PD6–15) followed by a marked increase at PD16–20, and mIPSCs frequency reached a plateau at about PD21–30.
The amplitude of mIPSCs showed a transient decrease at PD10–12 followed by an increase during PD13–30, and reached a plateau at about PD30.
Their decay time constant progressively decreased during the first 30 days postnatally, and reached a steady level at about PD30.
Paired recordings from interneurons and synaptically coupled target pyramidal cells revealed that uIPSC amplitude increased with age up to PD30.
In contrast, failure rate and coefficient of variation decreased during PD7–15 and showed little change at a later stage.
Short‐term depression induced by presynaptic stimulation at 33 Hz progressively decreased during PD6–20, and was stabilized at about PD21–30.
Quantal analysis revealed that the number of release sites increased with age up to PD30, while the release probability increased during PD6–12 and then reached a plateau level.
These results suggest that the number of release sites and release probability of GABA and GABA<jats:sub>A</jats:sub>‐mediated IPSC kinetics show distinct developmental profiles, which could play roles in regulating the onset and offset of critical periods for experience‐dependent cortical plasticity.</jats:p>
Social instability in female rats: The relationship between stress-related and anxiety-like consequences 1. Physiol Behav. 2005 Mar 31;84(4):511-8. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2005.01.005.

Social instability in female rats: the relationship between stress-related and 
anxiety-like consequences.

Baranyi J(1)
 Bakos N, Haller J.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Experimental Medicine, Laboratory of Endoctrine, 1450 Budapest, 
P.O.
Box 67, Hungary.
johanna@koki.hu

It is generally believed that anxiety and depression develop in response to 
stressful events that chronically increase glucocorticoid production (which in 
turn affects various neurotransmitter systems).
In contrast to depression, 
however, the relationship between chronic stress and anxiety is less clear, as 
anxiety patients often show normal glucocorticoid levels and respond normally to 
dexamethasone challenge.
Here we report on the interaction between symptoms of 
chronic stress and anxiety in female rats by making use of the social 
instability model of anxiety.
Subjects were exposed to alternating 24 h periods 
of isolation and moderate crowding for 14 days.
Symptoms of chronic stress and 
anxiety-like behaviour in the social interaction test were evaluated on the 15th 
day, i.e.
1 day after the last crowding phase.
Social instability resulted in 
decreased weight gain, and chronically elevated plasma glucocorticoid levels 
only in rats that showed high aggressiveness during the crowding phases.
In 
contrast, anxiety-like behaviour was increased irrespective to crowding-related 
aggressiveness.
Thus, the development of chronic stress symptoms and 
anxiety-like behaviour dissociated: the former was bound to crowding-induced 
aggressiveness (i.e.
to a higher stress load), whereas the latter occurred also 
when such aggressiveness was low, and symptoms of chronic stress did not 
develop.
This finding is consistent with human data, and suggests that stressful 
events lead to anxiety in both cases: when stressors do or do not lead to 
chronic stress responses.
Studying the distinctive features of anxieties 
associated or not with chronic endocrine stress responses would enhance our 
understanding of this disorder.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2005.01.005
PMID: 15811385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adaptation of monoaminergic responses to phencyclidine in nucleus accumbens and prefrontal cortex following repeated treatment with fluoxetine or imipramine 1. Brain Res. 2002 Dec 20;958(1):20-7. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03772-1.

Adaptation of monoaminergic responses to phencyclidine in nucleus accumbens and 
prefrontal cortex following repeated treatment with fluoxetine or imipramine.

De La Garza R 2nd(1)
 Jentsch JD, Verrico CD, Roth RH.
Author information:
(1)Neuropsychopharmacology Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry, Yale University 
School of Medicine, 333 Cedar Street, Sterling Hall of Medicine, B-256, New 
Haven, CT 06510, USA.
rdelagar@aecom.yu.edu

The adaptive neuronal changes that follow chronic administration of 
antidepressant drugs are thought to underlie clinical improvement in patient 
populations.
Recent evidence suggests that alterations specific to 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors may be a final common pathway to 
antidepressant action.
To investigate this possibility, we sought to establish 
the effects of chronic fluoxetine or imipramine treatment on the monoamine 
stimulating effect of the non-competitive NMDA antagonist phencyclidine.
Male, 
Sprague-Dawley rats (n=9/group) were treated with saline (1 ml/kg, i.p.
), 
imipramine (10 mg/kg, i.p.)
or fluoxetine (10 mg/kg, i.p.)
once daily for 14 
consecutive days.
After a 7-day drug-free period, animals given an acute 
challenge of either saline or phencyclidine (5 mg/kg, i.p.).
One hour later, 
animals were killed, brains were removed, and the prefrontal cortex, striatum, 
and nucleus accumbens were dissected.
Samples were assayed for the monoamines 
and their primary metabolites by HPLC.
Repeated treatment with fluoxetine or 
imipramine did not alter baseline dopamine or serotonin turnover.
Acute 
phencyclidine treatment increased prefrontal cortex and nucleus accumbens 
dopamine turnover in saline-treated animals (P<0.01); however, the effect in the 
nucleus accumbens was prevented in animals pretreated with imipramine or 
fluoxetine.
Acute phencyclidine challenge also increased serotonin turnover in 
prefrontal cortex of saline- or imipramine-pretreated rats (P<0.01), though this 
effect was attenuated in animals pretreated with fluoxetine.
Overall, the data 
suggest that repeated antidepressant treatment alters monoamine turnover in 
specific brain regions in response to blockade of NMDA receptors.
The data 
highlight the importance of adaptive responses to NMDA receptors resulting from 
chronic antidepressant treatment.
Copyright 2002 Elsevier Science B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)03772-1
PMID: 12468026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Glycogenolysis and lipolysis in Gallus domesticus during the perinatal period 1. Comp Gen Pharmacol. 1971 Jun;2(6):198-204. doi: 10.1016/0010-4035(71)90011-5.

Glycogenolysis and lipolysis in Gallus domesticus during the perinatal period.

Freeman BM
 Manning AC.
DOI: 10.1016/0010-4035(71)90011-5
PMID: 4353988 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Early effect of carbon tetrachloride on the ascorbic acid concentration in liver and ascorbic acid excretion in the urine in rats]. 1. Arch Toxikol. 1969;24(3):306-17.

[Early effect of carbon tetrachloride on the ascorbic acid concentration in 
liver and ascorbic acid excretion in the urine in rats].

[Article in German]

Hesse V
 Klinger W.

PMID: 5360666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
On the nature of electron and energy transport in mitochondria II. Multiple activation of mitochondrial respiration 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1968 Jan 15;153(1):70-9. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2728(68)90147-3.

On the nature of electron and energy transport in mitochondria. II. Multiple 
activation of mitochondrial respiration.

Nijs P.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2728(68)90147-3
PMID: 4170447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Norepinephrine transporter knock-out alters expression of the genes connected with antidepressant drugs action 1. Brain Res. 2015 Jan 12;1594:284-92. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.10.055. Epub 
2014 Nov 4.

Norepinephrine transporter knock-out alters expression of the genes connected 
with antidepressant drugs action.

Solich J(1)
 Kolasa M(2), Kusmider M(2), Faron-Gorecka A(2), Pabian P(2), 
Zurawek D(2), Szafran-Pilch K(2), Dziedzicka-Wasylewska M(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Smetna 12, 31-343 Krakow, Poland.
Electronic address: 
solich@if-pan.krakow.pl.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Smetna 12, 31-343 Krakow, Poland.
Norepinephrine transporter knock-out mice (NET-KO) exhibit depression-resistant 
phenotypes.
They manifest significantly shorter immobility times in both the 
forced swim test and the tail suspension test.
Moreover, biochemical studies 
have revealed the up-regulation of other monoamine transporters (dopamine and 
serotonin) in the brains of NET-KO mice, similar to the phenomenon observed 
after the chronic pharmacological blockade of norepinephrine transporter by 
desipramine in wild-type (WT) animals.
NET-KO mice are also resistant to stress, 
as we demonstrated previously by measuring plasma corticosterone concentration.
In the present study, we used a microdissection technique to separate target 
brain regions and the TaqMan Low Density Array approach to test the expression 
of a group of genes in the NET-KO mice compared with WT animals.
A group of 
genes with altered expression were identified in four brain structures (frontal 
and cingulate cortices, dentate gyrus of hippocampus and basal-lateral amygdala) 
of NET-KO mice compared with WT mice.
These genes are known to be altered by 
antidepressant drugs administration.
The most interesting gene is Crh-bp, which 
modulates the activity of corticotrophin--releasing hormone (CRH) and several 
CRH-family members.
Generally, genetic disturbances within noradrenergic neurons 
result in biological changes, such as in signal transduction and intercellular 
communication, and may be linked to changes in noradrenaline levels in the 
brains of NET-KO mice.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.10.055
PMID: 25451113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Strain variations in the utilization of hexoses by Ehrlich ascites tumor cells 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1968 Oct 15;165(3):364-73. doi: 
10.1016/0304-4165(68)90214-6.

Strain variations in the utilization of hexoses by Ehrlich ascites tumor cells.

Letnansky K.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-4165(68)90214-6
PMID: 5737930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Endogenous Lipid Pneumonia in an African Grey Parrot (Psittacus erithacus erithacus) 1. J Comp Pathol. 2013 Aug-Oct;149(2-3):381-4. doi: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2013.01.008. 
Epub 2013 Apr 10.

Endogenous lipid pneumonia in an African grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus 
erithacus).

Costa T(1)
 Grífols J, Perpiñán D.

Author information:
(1)Departament de Sanitat i Anatomia Animals, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 
08193 Bellaterra, Barcelona, Spain.
tai.pcosta@gmail.com

Lipid pneumonia is an unusual, non-infectious, inflammatory lung disease 
characterized by patchy pneumonic consolidation secondary to accumulation of 
lipid in macrophages.
It can be classified as exogenous or endogenous, depending 
on whether it is associated with the aspiration of foreign material.
Endogenous 
lipid pneumonia (EnLP) has been reported in many mammal species.
In pet birds, 
EnLP is an incidental and uncommon lesion of unknown pathogenesis.
A 35-year-old 
African grey parrot (Psittacus erithacus erithacus) was presented for depression 
lasting several months, with marked worsening over the 2 days prior to 
presentation.
The animal died shortly after admission.
Necropsy examination 
showed that the lungs were firm with diffuse grey discolouration.
Microscopically, there was EnLP, anthracosis, severe atherosclerosis and hepatic 
amyloidosis.
Although the pathogenesis of EnLP in birds is not clear, it has 
been associated with concurrent atherosclerosis, hepatic diseases and other 
lesions of the respiratory tract.
This is the first description of EnLP in a 
bird associated with severe respiratory distress.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jcpa.2013.01.008
PMID: 23582929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Study of huchang qingfei pellets on immune function in rats infected with Mycoplasma pneumoniae]. 1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2005 Mar;30(5):366-9.

[Study of huchang qingfei pellets on immune function in rats infected with 
Mycoplasma pneumoniae].

[Article in Chinese]

Li JC(1)
 Wang WM, Zhang HJ, Dong L.

Author information:
(1)Heilongjiang Academy of Traditional Chinese Medicine Research Institute, 
Harbin 150036, China.
lijichang828@sina.com

OBJECTIVE: To study the effects and mechanism of Huchang Qingfei pellets on 
immune function in rats infected with mycoplasma pneumoniae.
METHOD: A rat model of mycoplasmal pneumonia (MP) was developed in repeated 
intranasal infectious routes and then the humoral and cellular immunocompetences 
were detected by radioimmunoassay, immune-turbidimetry and flow cytometry.
RESULT: The levels of serum IgG,IgM and IL-2, IL-6 were enhinced obviously, the 
complement C3 and TNF-alpha were decreased and the ratio of CD4+ /CD8+ was 
improved significantly in the Huchang groups as compared with MP model group.
CONCLUSION: Huchang Qingfei pellets can reinforce immune function via preventing 
both cellular and humoral immunity from depression in the rats with MP.
PMID: 15806971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Macromolecular synthetic activity in mice regenerating liver after ethylnitrosourea injection. 1. Physiol Bohemoslov. 1979;28(2):151-9.

Macromolecular synthetic activity in mice regenerating liver after 
ethylnitrosourea injection.

Itze L
 Vesselinovitch SD, Rao KV, Hruban Z, Itzeová V.

The present report is a continuation of our previous studies on the biochemical 
mechanisms of carcinogenesis; studying the nature of interactions taking place 
between Ethylnitrosourea and DNA, RNA and protein of various stages of their 
synthetic activity.
As a model system we chose partially hepatectomized mice 
live 36 hrs after surgery.
Synthetic macromolecule activity in the remaining 
liver segment was determined by means of 3H-thymidine, 3H-uridine and 
3H-leucine.
We observed complete depression of DNA synthetic activity 
(immediately after Ethylnitrosourea administration it remained depressed almost 
through out the whole period of our observations) while protein synthetic 
activity was highly elevated.
Qualitative changes of soluble proteins which were 
analyzed by isoelectric fractionation on 5% polyacrylamide after previous 3H- 
and 14C-leucine incorporation, could not be detected.
Our biochemical data are 
correlated with histological studies and with the tumour incidence following the 
Ethylnitrosourea treatment of partially hepatectomized mice in the course of 
long-term experiments.
The results provide guideline for further analysis, which 
should be modified according to the information concerning Ethylnitrosourea 
carcinogenesis induced 36 hours after partial hepatectmoy.
PMID: 156933 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Heavy metals zinc
 cadmium, and copper stimulate pulmonary sensory neurons via direct activation of TRPA1 <jats:p> Airway exposure to zinc dust and zinc-containing ambient particulates can cause symptoms of airway irritation and inflammation, but the underlying molecular and cellular mechanisms are largely unknown.
Transient receptor potential A1 (TRPA1) is selectively expressed in a subpopulation of pulmonary C-fiber afferents and has been considered as a major irritant sensor in the lung and airways.
Using whole cell patch-clamp recording and Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> imaging, we have demonstrated that application of ZnCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> concentration dependently evoked inward current and Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> transient in isolated vagal pulmonary sensory neurons; both responses were almost completely inhibited after pretreatment with AP18, a specific TRPA1 antagonist.
In anesthetized spontaneously breathing animals, intratracheal instillation of ZnCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> (2 mM, 25 μl) induced pronounced respiratory depression in wild-type mice, and the effect was essentially absent in TRPA1-deficient mice.
In addition, our study showed that two other heavy metals, cadmium and copper, also stimulated pulmonary sensory neurons via a direct activation of TRPA1.
In summary, our results suggest that activation of TRPA1 in pulmonary C-fiber sensory nerves may contribute to the respiratory toxicity induced by airway exposure to these three heavy metals.
</jats:p>
Responses to cortical injury: II. Widespread depression of the activity of an enzyme in cortex remote from a focal injury 1. Brain Res. 1981 Apr 27;211(1):79-89. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(81)90068-8.

Responses to cortical injury: II. Widespread depression of the activity of an 
enzyme in cortex remote from a focal injury.

Dail WG
 Feeney DM, Murray HM, Linn RT, Boyeson MG.

As a part of a broader study of the reaction of the brain to injury, we report 
here an interesting loss of the activity of an enzyme in areas quite remote from 
the site of direct injury.
At 36 h following a laceration or contusion injury to 
the hindpaw area of the motor cortex, a peculiar loss of staining for the enzyme 
alpha glycerophosphate dehydrogenase (alpha-GPDH) was noted.
alpha-GPDH activity 
was markedly depressed in cortical layers II and III throughout the hemisphere 
on the side of the injury.
The depression of alpha-GPDH activity extended far 
laterally across the rhinal fissure into the pyriform cortex.
The decrease in 
alpha-GPDH staining was prominent 4 days after the injury: however, the staining 
pattern had returned to normal at 9 days.
Enzyme changes in animals lesioned in 
the occipital cortex paralleled that seen in animals with a lesion in the motor 
cortex.
Animals which had received an undercut lesion in the motor cortex 56 
days earlier were contused in the occipital cortex.
The old injury site 
presented the same sequelae of changes as seen in other lesioned animals.
Additionally, a suction ablation injury involving only a small part of motor 
cortex resulted in the same widespread reduction of staining for alpha-GPDH in 
layers II and III.
The derangement in energy metabolism suggests that cells in 
layers II and III of the cerebral cortex may be particularly vulnerable to 
perturbations induced by cortical trauma.
These findings may be related to the 
diffuse and transient functional losses observed after head injury in man.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(81)90068-8
PMID: 6784887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Insomnia and exacerbation of anxiety associated with high-EPA fish oil supplements after successful treatment of depression 1. Oxf Med Case Reports. 2015 Mar 25;2015(3):244-5. doi: 10.1093/omcr/omv024. 
eCollection 2015 Mar.

Insomnia and exacerbation of anxiety associated with high-EPA fish oil 
supplements after successful treatment of depression.

Blanchard LB(1)
 McCarter GC(2).
Author information:
(1)North Oakland Family Practice , Oakland, CA , USA.
(2)Department of Biological and Pharmaceutical Sciences , Touro University 
California College of Pharmacy , Vallejo, CA , USA.
A 54-year-old male consulted his general practitioner for increasing general 
anxiety and mild panic attacks despite effective treatment for recurrent major 
depressive disorder, which included a fish oil supplement enriched in 
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA).
The patient would awaken suddenly at night with 
shortness of breath and overwhelming worry.
During the daytime, he felt a 
general, nonspecific anxiety and frequently experienced sympathetic activation 
upon confronting routine challenges.
He also experienced dyspnea-induced 
feelings of panic.
He reported that he stopped taking the fish oil supplements 
after several more months of symptoms, and his anxiety and insomnia then largely 
disappeared.
Several weeks later, he resumed consumption of high-EPA fish oil at 
the prior dosage for 2 days.
On both nights, the patient reported nighttime 
awakening similar to the previous episodes, followed by daytime agitation.
Since 
halting the fish oil supplements, the anxiety and insomnia have not returned and 
his depression remains in remission.
DOI: 10.1093/omcr/omv024
PMCID: PMC4664844
PMID: 26634135
Astragalar morphology of <i>Afradapis</i>
 a large adapiform primate from the earliest late Eocene of Egypt <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The ∼37 million‐year‐old Birket Qarun Locality 2 (BQ‐2), in the Birket Qarun Formation of Egypt's Fayum Depression, yields evidence for a diverse primate fauna, including the earliest known lorisiforms, parapithecoid anthropoids, and <jats:italic>Afradapis longicristatus</jats:italic>, a large folivorous adapiform.
Phylogenetic analysis has placed <jats:italic>Afradapis</jats:italic> as a stem strepsirrhine within a clade of caenopithecine adapiforms, contradicting the recently popularized alternative hypothesis aligning adapiforms with haplorhines or anthropoids.
We describe an astragalus from BQ‐2 (DPC 21445C), attributable to <jats:italic>Afradapis</jats:italic> on the basis of size and relative abundance.
The astragalus is remarkably similar to those of extant lorises, having a low body, no posterior shelf, a broad head and neck.
It is like extant strepsirrhines more generally, in having a fibular facet that slopes gently away from the lateral tibial facet, and in having a groove for the tendon of flexor fibularis that is lateral to the tibial facet.
Comparisons to a sample of euarchontan astragali show the new fossil to be most similar to those of adapines and lorisids.
The astragali of other adapiforms are most similar to those of lemurs, but distinctly different from those of all anthropoids.
Our measurements show that in extant strepsirrhines and adapiforms the fibular facet slopes away from the lateral tibial facet at a gradual angle (112–126°), in contrast to the anthropoid fibular facet, which forms a sharper angle (87–101°).
Phylogenetic analyses incorporating new information from the astragalus continue to support strepsirrhine affinities for adapiforms under varying models of character evolution.
Am J Phys Anthropol 143:383‐402, 2010.
© 2010 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
Region-specific dysregulation of allopregnanolone brain content in the olfactory bulbectomized rat model of depression 1. Brain Res. 2003 Jun 20;976(1):1-8. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(03)02577-0.

Region-specific dysregulation of allopregnanolone brain content in the olfactory 
bulbectomized rat model of depression.

Uzunova V(1)
 Ceci M, Kohler C, Uzunov DP, Wrynn AS.
Author information:
(1)Novartis Institutes for BioMedical Research, Nervous System, Novartis Pharma 
AG, WSJ-386.3.26, CH-4002 Basel, Switzerland.
Allopregnanolone (ALLO) is one of the most potent positive endogenous allosteric 
modulators of the type A gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA(A)) receptors.
While the 
robust anxiolytic profile of ALLO has been extensively characterized in rodents 
and its antidepressant-like effect was recently demonstrated in mice, there have 
been only few reports on alterations of brain ALLO levels in putative animal 
models of depression and anxiety.
Removal of the olfactory bulbs of rats 
produces one of the most predictive animal models with which to screen for drugs 
with potential antidepressant activity following repeated treatment.
We 
therefore investigated whether the olfactory bulbectomized (OB) rat model of 
depression may be associated with alterations of ALLO levels in whole brain 
tissue and in different brain regions.
We determined ALLO levels in whole brain, 
amygdala, frontal cortex, hippocampus, and whole cerebral cortex of OB or 
sham-operated rats at 7, 14, or 28 days following bulbectomy or sham surgery.
We 
observed a significant increase of whole brain ALLO content at 7 and 28 days 
post-surgery in the OB rats.
At days 7 and 14 following olfactory bulb removal, 
ALLO levels were significantly decreased in amygdala and frontal cortex and 
significantly increased in whole cerebral cortex.
In the hippocampus we observed 
only a tendency for decreased ALLO levels at day 14.
Our data indicates a strong 
region-specific dysregulation of ALLO homeostasis in brains of OB rats which may 
contribute to the formation of the bulbectomy syndrome via a sustained reduction 
in physiological GABA-ergic tone in amygdala and frontal cortex.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(03)02577-0
PMID: 12763616 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Activation of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors induces long-term depression in the hippocampal CA1 region of adult rats in vitro 1. Neurosci Res. 2008 Sep;62(1):43-50. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2008.06.002. Epub
2008  Jun 17.

Activation of group I metabotropic glutamate receptors induces long-term 
depression in the hippocampal CA1 region of adult rats in vitro.

Wang W(1)
 Zhang Z, Shang J, Jiang ZZ, Wang S, Liu Y, Zhang LY.
Author information:
(1)National Drug Screening Laboratory, New Drug Screening Center, China 
Pharmaceutical University, Nanjing, China.
Previous studies have implicated that long-term depression (LTD) was 
developmentally regulated since LTD can be readily induced by low frequency 
stimulation (LFS) in acute hippocampal slices prepared from juvenile but not 
adult animals.
Here, we have examined the LTD induced by LFS (1Hz, 900 pulses) 
paired with a certain pattern at the Schaffer collateral-CAl synapse in adult 
hippocampal slices.
We found that, in the 90-day-old rat hippocampus, LTD could 
be induced reliably by LFS paired with stronger stimulus intensity than that 
used during baseline recording.
However, this synaptic depression could be 
completely abolished by application of metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) 
antagonist (S)-amethyl-4-carboxyphenylglycine (MCPG) which had no effect on that 
induced by the same protocol in the 16-day-old rat hippocampus.
Furthermore, 
preincubation with group I mGluR antagonist, 2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)-pyridine 
(MPEP) and (S)-2-methyl-4-carboxyphenylglycine (LY367385), also completely 
prevented the LFS-induced LTD.
In contrast, group II mGluR antagonist 
(2S)-a-ethylglutamic acid (EGLU), N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor 
antagonist APV and voltage-gated calcium channel antagonist nimodipine had no 
effect on the LFS-induced LTD. Taken together, these observations suggest that 
LFS paired with strong stimulus strength can efficiently induce group I 
mGluR-dependent LTD in the adult hippocampal CA1 region, proving insight into 
the functional significance of hippocampal mGluR-mediated LTD in learning and 
memory.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neures.2008.06.002
PMID: 18602428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Behavioral effects of intrahippocampal injections of clonidine
 yohimbine and salbutamol in the rat 1.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav.
1987 Feb;26(2):421-4. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(87)90140-7.
Behavioral effects of intrahippocampal injections of clonidine, yohimbine and 
salbutamol in the rat.
Verleye M, Bernet F.

Intrahippocampal injections of adrenergic drugs, clonidine (an alpha 2-agonist), 
yohimbine (an alpha 2-antagonist), and salbutamol (a beta 2-agonist) were 
performed in the awake rat.
The injection of a high dose of clonidine caused a 
depression in locomotion in the open-field.
Yohimbine partially antagonized the 
clonidine-induced hypomotility.
The intrahippocampal injection of salbutamol had 
no effect on ambulatory behavior of the rat.
These results suggest that the role 
played by the anterodorsal hippocampus in modifying behavior in novel situations 
is dependent on the specific sub-population of adrenoceptors that is stimulated.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(87)90140-7
PMID: 3575361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Losartan increases renal blood flow during isoflurane anesthesia in sheep <jats:p><jats:bold>Background:</jats:bold> Inhaled anesthetics cause a transient reversible depression of renal function by direct renal effects or indirectly by changes in neurohumoral systems or cardiovascular performance. When the sympathetic nervous activity is decreased during anesthesia
 other vasoactive systems like vasopressin (AVP) and particularly the renin angiotensin system (RAS) are of importance for blood pressure maintenance.
Little is known about how the renal circulation is affected by angiotensin receptor blockade during isoflurane anesthesia.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Methods:</jats:bold> The study was performed on isoflurane anesthetized sheep equipped with flow probes (placed around a femoral and a renal artery) and a pulmonary artery catheter.
During stable conditions the sheep were given one or more of the following substances: isotonic saline (NaCl); losartan (LOS) 10 mg ·  kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>; prazosin (PRAZ) 0.2 mg · kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>  and a vasopressin V<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>‐receptor antagonist (AVP‐a) 10 μg · kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Results:</jats:bold> LOS and AVP‐a did not affect mean arterial pressure (MAP), whereas PRAZ lowered MAP significantly (from 98±12 to 65±7 mmHg).
Renal blood flow (RBF) increased after LOS treatment (148±34 to 222±33 ml · min<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>).
The other substances were without effect on RBF.
Femoral blood flow remained unchanged after all treatments.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Conclusion:</jats:bold> We conclude that the sympathoadrenal system is still the major determinant for blood pressure maintenance during isoflurane anesthesia in sheep.
The apparently increased activity of the renin angiotensin system in this situation causes a reduction in renal blood flow, which is counteracted by angiotensin II AT<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>‐receptor blockade.</jats:p>
Subarachnoid Hemorrhage Induces Dynamic Changes in Regional Cerebral Metabolism in Rats 1. J Neurotrauma. 2002 Apr;19(4):449-66. doi: 10.1089/08977150252932406.

Subarachnoid hemorrhage induces dynamic changes in regional cerebral metabolism 
in rats.

Glenn TC(1)
 Patel AB, Martin NA, Samii A, De Jesus C, Hovda DA.
Author information:
(1)Division of Neurosurgery, Department of Surgery, UCLA School of Medicine, 
90095-7039, USA.
tglenn@mednet.ucla.edu

Following a subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH), adult rats exhibit dynamic regional 
changes in cerebral glucose metabolism characterized by an increase in metabolic 
rates and a subsequent upregulation of cytochrome oxidase (CO).
We evaluated 
both local cerebral metabolic rates for glucose (ICMRglc: (mol/100 g/min) and CO 
in 23 brain regions of interest (ROI).
Sham animals underwent anesthesia and 
superficial surgery; saline-controls received an injection of 0.9% saline into 
the cisterna magna; and SAH rats received an injection of autologous blood into 
the cisterna magna.
This blood, measured by albumin labeled with radioactive 
carbon 14, distributed throughout the brain but predominated ventrally.
After 
experimental animals were sacrificed at day 0 (3 h), 1, 3, and 7 days 
postinjection, ROI were analyzed using [14C]2-deoxy-D-glucose autoradiography 
and CO histochemistry.
ICMRglc in SAH rats increased in many regions (ranging 
from 0.7% to 32.2% above sham levels).
Cytochrome oxidase also increased from 1% 
to 9% above sham levels, peaking on day 3.
Conversely, saline-controls exhibited 
prolonged depression of ICMRglc (ranging from 11% to 35% below sham levels) and 
CO (ranging from 4% to 11% below sham levels) from day 0 through day 7.
All 
saline-control ROI for all time points showed this metabolic depression, and 
between 91% and 95% of saline-control ROI presented lower CO levels as compared 
to sham.
Overall, ICMRglc and CO levels were greater in SAH than in 
saline-control ROI.
However, when considering the influence of subarachnoid 
blood on metabolic changes in SAH animals, both CO and 2DG levels did not 
correlate well with the amount of 14C-albumin binding.
While previous studies 
have measured both metabolic rates of glucose and CO soon after SAH, this is the 
first to simultaneously conduct these measurements in the same SAH rat model.
DOI: 10.1089/08977150252932406
PMID: 11990351 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
M4 Muscarinic Receptor Signaling Ameliorates Striatal Plasticity Deficits in Models of L-DOPA-Induced Dyskinesia. 1. Neuron. 2015 Nov 18;88(4):762-73. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.039.

M4 Muscarinic Receptor Signaling Ameliorates Striatal Plasticity Deficits in 
Models of L-DOPA-Induced Dyskinesia.

Shen W(1)
 Plotkin JL(1), Francardo V(2), Ko WK(3), Xie Z(1), Li Q(4), 
Fieblinger T(2), Wess J(5), Neubig RR(6), Lindsley CW(7), Conn PJ(7), Greengard 
P(8), Bezard E(3), Cenci MA(2), Surmeier DJ(9).
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
(2)Basal Ganglia Pathophysiology Unit, Department of Experimental Medical 
Science, Lund University, 221 84 Lund, Sweden.
(3)Université de Bordeaux, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 5293, 
F-33000 Bordeaux, France; CNRS, Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, UMR 
5293, F-33000 Bordeaux, France; Motac Neuroscience, Manchester M13 9XX, UK.
(4)Motac Neuroscience, Manchester M13 9XX, UK.
(5)Molecular Signaling Section, Laboratory of Bioorganic Chemistry, National 
Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National Institutes of 
Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(6)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Michigan State University, East 
Lansing, MI 48824, USA.
(7)Department of Pharmacology and Vanderbilt Center for Neuroscience Drug 
Discovery, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN 37232, USA.
(8)Laboratory of Molecular and Cellular Neuroscience, Rockefeller University, 
New York, NY 10065, USA.
(9)Department of Physiology, Feinberg School of Medicine, Northwestern 
University, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
Electronic address: 
j-surmeier@northwestern.edu.
Erratum in
    Neuron.
2016 Jun 1;90(5):1139. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2016.05.017.
Comment in
    Neuron.
2015 Nov 18;88(4):621-3. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.11.007.
A balanced interaction between dopaminergic and cholinergic signaling in the 
striatum is critical to goal-directed behavior.
But how this interaction 
modulates corticostriatal synaptic plasticity underlying learned actions remains 
unclear--particularly in direct-pathway spiny projection neurons (dSPNs).
Our 
studies show that in dSPNs, endogenous cholinergic signaling through M4 
muscarinic receptors (M4Rs) promoted long-term depression of corticostriatal 
glutamatergic synapses, by suppressing regulator of G protein signaling type 4 
(RGS4) activity, and blocked D1 dopamine receptor dependent long-term 
potentiation (LTP).
Furthermore, in a mouse model of 
L-3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine (L-DOPA)-induced dyskinesia (LID) in Parkinson's 
disease (PD), boosting M4R signaling with positive allosteric modulator (PAM) 
blocked aberrant LTP in dSPNs, enabled LTP reversal, and attenuated dyskinetic 
behaviors.
An M4R PAM also was effective in a primate LID model.
Taken together, 
these studies identify an important signaling pathway controlling striatal 
synaptic plasticity and point to a novel pharmacological strategy for 
alleviating LID in PD patients.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.10.039
PMCID: PMC4864040
PMID: 26590347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Frequency Facilitation at Mossy Fiber-CA3 Synapses of Freely Behaving Rats Contributes to the Induction of Persistent LTD via an Adenosine-A1 Receptor-Regulated Mechanism 1. Cereb Cortex. 2010 May;20(5):1121-30. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhp184. Epub 2009
Nov  10.

Frequency facilitation at mossy fiber-CA3 synapses of freely behaving rats 
contributes to the induction of persistent LTD via an adenosine-A1 
receptor-regulated mechanism.

Hagena H(1)
 Manahan-Vaughan D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Neurophysiology, Medical Faculty, Ruhr University 
Bochum, 44780 Bochum, Germany.
Frequency facilitation (FF), comprising a rapid and multiple-fold increase in 
the magnitude of evoked field potentials, is elicited by low-frequency 
stimulation (LFS) at mossy fiber-CA3 synapses.
Here, we show that in freely 
behaving rats, FF reliably occurs in response to 1 and 2Hz but not in response 
to 0.25-, 0.3-, or 0.5-Hz LFS.
Strikingly, prolonged (approximately 600 s) FF 
was tightly correlated to the induction of long-term depression (LTD) in freely 
moving animals.
Although LFS at 2 Hz elicited unstable FF and unstable LTD, 
application of LFS at 1 Hz elicited pronounced FF, as well as robust LTD that 
persisted for over 24 h. This correlation of prolonged FF with LTD was absent at 
stimulation frequencies that did not induce FF.
The adenosine-A1 receptor 
appears to participate in these effects: Application of adenosine-A1, but not 
adenosine-A3, receptor antagonists enhanced mossy fiber synaptic transmission 
and occluded FF.
Furthermore, adenosine-A1 receptor antagonism resulted in more 
stable FF at 1 or 2 Hz and elicited more potent LTD.
These data support the fact 
that FF contributes to the enablement of long-term information storage at mossy 
fiber-CA3 synapses and that the adenosine-A1 receptor may regulate the 
thresholds for this process.
DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhp184
PMCID: PMC2852506
PMID: 19903765 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Relationship between elongation factor 1- and elongation factor 2-dependent guanosine triphosphatase activities of ribosomes. Inhibition of both activities by ricin <jats:p>The elongation factor 1- and elongation factor 2-dependent GTPase (guanosine triphosphatase) activities of ribosomes are inhibited by ricin
 a toxic protein known to inactivate the 60S ribosomal subunit.
It is suggested that also in eukaryotic ribosomes a “GTPase site’, located on the larger subunit, is common to the two elongation factors.</jats:p>
The onset of response habituation during the growth of the lateral giant neuron of crayfish <jats:p> 1. The postembryonic development of the crayfish LG tailflip command neuron's response to mechanosensory input was studied with standard electrophysiological techniques in animals between 1 and 12 cm long. 2. LG neurons are present in each abdominal hemisegment where they receive direct and indirect excitatory input from mechanosensory afferents. In both small and large crayfish
 electrical stimulation of an abdominal ganglionic nerve containing those afferents evoked a compound excitatory postsynaptic potential (EPSP) with an early, reliable alpha component and a later, depression-prone beta wave.
It is known that the alpha and beta components are produced by inputs from primary mechanosensory afferents and interneurons, respectively.
3.
In crayfish &lt; 2 cm long, LG was excited by the alpha component.
When superthreshold, the alpha component triggered a single spike; additional excitation provided by the later beta wave presumably was preempted by refractoriness following the alpha spike and by recurrent inhibition of LG excited by the spike.
LG was excited reliably by the alpha component in response to repeated superthreshold stimulation.
4.
In crayfish between 2 and 3 cm, LG was excited more readily by the beta wave than by the alpha component.
LG's beta spike response habituated to repeated stimulation at 1 Hz, and the beta EPSP depressed whereas the alpha component was largely unchanged.
The appearance of the cellular substrates of habituation correlates with the reported onset of behavioral habituation of the tailflip response.
Higher stimulus levels brought the alpha EPSP to threshold.
Repetitive stimulation at these levels reliably evoked LG spikes from the alpha EPSP.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </jats:p>
Graft-versus-host reaction and lymphoid organs in normally fed and protein-deprived rats 1. Experientia. 1976 May 15;32(5):638-9. doi: 10.1007/BF01990208.

Graft-versus-host reaction and lymphoid organs in normally fed and 
protein-deprived rats.

Aschkenasy A.

Lymph node graft-versus-host reaction (GVHR) induced by parental splenic 
lymphocytes inoculated into hind foot pads of F-1 hybrid rats is correlated with 
the state of the thymus and the spleen of the recipients. This may explain the 
depression of the reaction after protracted protein deprivation. Furthermore
 
GVHR provokes mainly in normal rats a reduction of thymus and spleen possibly 
due to a T-cell transfer to the grafted area.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01990208
PMID: 6299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of isoproterenol on myocardial  structure and function in septic rats <jats:p> In this study we sought to determine the effect of sepsis on two sequelae of prolonged (24-h) β-agonist administration
 myocardial hypertrophy and catecholamine-induced cardiotoxicity.
Sprague-Dawley rats were randomized to cecal ligation and perforation (CLP) or sham study groups and then further randomized to receive isoproterenol (2.4 mg ⋅ kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> ⋅ day<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> iv) or placebo treatment.
At 24 h, myocardial function was assessed by using the Langendorff isolated-heart technique or the heart processed for plain light microscopy.
We found that 1) sepsis reduced contractile function, indicated by a rightward shift in the Starling curve (ANOVA with repeated measures, sepsis effect, P &lt; 0.002); 2) sepsis-induced myocardial depression was reversed by isoproterenol treatment (isoproterenol effect, P &lt; 0.0001); 3) sepsis reduced, but did not block, isoproterenol-induced myocardial hypertrophy (isoproterenol effect, P &lt; 0.0001); 4) sepsis did not protect the heart from catecholamine-induced tissue injury; 5) the septic heart was protected against the effects of ischemiareperfusion (decreased postreperfusion resting tension, ANOVA with repeated measures, P &lt; 0.01), an effect attenuated by isoproterenol treatment ( P &lt; 0.005); and 6) sepsis reduced the incidence of sustained asystole or ventricular fibrillation after ischemia-reperfusion ( P &lt; 0.05), an effect also attenuated by isoproterenol treatment ( P &lt; 0.01).
We conclude that, in sepsis, β-agonists induce changes in myocardial weight and function consistent with acute myocardial hypertrophy.
These changes occur at the expense of significant tissue injury and increased sensitivity to ischemia-reperfusion-induced tissue injury.
</jats:p>
Pentobarbital Depressant Effects Are Independent of GABA Receptors in Auditory Thalamic Neurons <jats:p>Pentobarbital
 a general anesthetic, has received extensive study for its ability to potentiate inhibition at GABA<jats:sub>A</jats:sub>subtype of receptors for GABA.
Using whole cell current-clamp techniques and bath applications, we determined the effects of pentobarbital and GABA receptor antagonists on the membrane properties and tonic or burst firing of medial geniculate neurons in thalamic slices.
Pentobarbital (0.01–200 μM) induced depressant effects in 50 of 66 neurons (76%).
Pentobarbital hyperpolarized neurons by a mean of 3 mV and decreased the number of action potentials in tonic firing, evoked by current pulse injection from near the resting potential.
Pentobarbital also decreased burst firing or low threshold Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>-spikes, evoked by current pulse injection into neurons at potentials hyperpolarized from rest.
The blockade of tonic and burst firing, as well as low threshold Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>-spikes, was surmountable by increasing the amplitude of input current.
The GABA<jats:sub>A</jats:sub>receptor antagonists, bicuculline (100 μM) and picrotoxinin (50–100 μM), did not block the depressant effects of pentobarbital (10 μM).
The GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>receptor antagonist, saclofen (200 μM), and GABA<jats:sub>C</jats:sub>receptor antagonist, (1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine-4-yl)methylphosphinate (10–50 μM), did not significantly alter the depressant effects.
Pentobarbital produced excitatory effects (0.1–50 μM) on 11 neurons (17%) but had no effects on 5 neurons (7%).
The excitation consisted of approximately 3 mV depolarization, increased tonic and burst firing and the rate of rise and amplitude of low threshold Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>spikes.
These effects were associated with a increase in input resistance.
In contrast, the depressant effects of pentobarbital correlated to a decreased input resistance measured with hyperpolarizing current pulse injection (IC<jats:sub>50</jats:sub>= 7.8 μM).
Pentobarbital reduced Na<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>-dependent rectification on depolarization and lowered the slope resistance over a wide voltage range.
Tetrodotoxin eliminated both Na<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>-dependent rectification and the pentobarbital-induced decrease in membrane resistance at depolarized voltages in two-thirds of the neurons.
The pentobarbital-induced decrease in membrane resistance at voltages hyperpolarized from rest was not evident during co-application with Cs<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>, known to block the hyperpolarization-activated rectifiers.
In summary, the pentobarbital acted at low concentrations to depress thalamocortical neurons.
The depression resulted from decreased rectification on depolarization, which no longer boosted potentials over threshold, and an increased conductance that shunted spike generation.
The depressant effects of pentobarbital did not involve known types of GABA receptor interactions.</jats:p>
Effects of somatostatin on self-stimulation behaviour in rats pretreated with a receptor blocker 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1988 Apr 27;149(1-2):141-4. doi:
10.1016/0014-2999(88)90052-0.

Effects of somatostatin on self-stimulation behaviour in rats pretreated with a 
receptor blocker.

Balázs M(1)
 Schwarzberg H, Telegdy G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, University Medical School, Szeged, Hungary.
The effects of somatostatin on lateral hypothalamic self-stimulation were 
investigated in rats pretreated with haloperidol, bicuculline, phenoxybenzamine 
or propranolol.
Somatostatin decreased the rate of self-stimulation.
Halperidol, 
bicuculline and phenoxybenzamine potentiated the somatostatin-induced depression 
of self-stimulation behaviour.
Propranolol had no effect.
It is suggested that 
dopaminergic, GABAergic and noradrenergic systems are involved in the 
somatostatin-induced depression of self-stimulation.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(88)90052-0
PMID: 2899512 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Glucocorticoid Programing of the Mesopontine Cholinergic System 1. Front Endocrinol (Lausanne). 2013 Dec 13;4:190. doi: 10.3389/fendo.2013.00190.
 eCollection 2013.

Glucocorticoid programing of the mesopontine cholinergic system.

Borges S(1)
 Coimbra B(1), Soares-Cunha C(1), Ventura-Silva AP(1), Pinto L(1), 
Carvalho MM(1), Pêgo JM(1), Rodrigues AJ(1), Sousa N(1).
Author information:
(1)Life and Health Sciences Research Institute (ICVS), School of Health 
Sciences, University of Minho , Braga , Portugal ; ICVS/3B's - PT Government 
Associate Laboratory , Braga/Guimarães , Portugal.
Stress perception, response, adaptation, and coping strategies are individually 
distinct, and the sequel of stress and/or glucocorticoids (GCs) is also distinct 
between subjects.
In the last years, it has become clear that early life stress 
is a powerful modulator of neuroendocrine stress-responsive circuits, programing 
intrinsic susceptibility to stress, and potentiating the appearance of 
stress-related disorders such as depression, anxiety, and addiction.
Herein we 
were interested in understanding how early life experiences reset the normal 
processing of negative stimuli, leading to emotional dysfunction.
Animals 
prenatally exposed to GCs (in utero glucocorticoid exposure, iuGC) present 
hyperanxiety, increased fear behavior, and hyper-reactivity to negative stimuli.
In parallel, we found a remarkable increase in the number of aversive 22 kHz 
ultrasonic vocalizations in response to an aversive cue.
Considering the 
suggested role of the mesopontine tegmentum cholinergic pathway, arising from 
the laterodorsal tegmental nucleus (LDT) and pedunculopontine tegmental nucleus 
(PPT), in the initiation of 22 kHz vocalizations and hypothetically in the 
control of emotional arousal and tone, we decided to evaluate the condition of 
this circuit in iuGC animals.
Notably, in a basal situation, iuGC animals 
present increased choline acetyltransferase (ChAT) expression in the LDT and 
PPT, but not in other cholinergic nuclei, namely in the nucleus basalis of 
Meynert.
In addition, and in accordance with the amplified response to an 
adverse stimulus of iuGC animals, we found marked changes in the cholinergic 
activation pattern of LDT and PPT regions.
Altogether, our results suggest a 
specific cholinergic pathway programing by prenatal GC, and hint that this may 
be of relevance in setting individual stress vulnerability threshold.
DOI: 10.3389/fendo.2013.00190
PMCID: PMC3862116
PMID: 24379803
DEPRESSION OF RESPONSE IN THE CHICKS EXPOSED TO MAMMALIAN ERYTHROCYTE ANTIGEN AT HATCHING. 1. Jpn J Exp Med. 1963 Apr;33:95-106.

DEPRESSION OF RESPONSE IN THE CHICKS EXPOSED TO MAMMALIAN ERYTHROCYTE ANTIGEN AT 
HATCHING.

FUJIWARA K
 TAKAGAKI Y, TAJIMA Y.

PMID: 14057140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Tonic and baroreflex effects on arterial pressure and ventilation of pentobarbital and nicotine on the rat ventral medullary surface 1. Brain Res. 1989 Apr 24;485(2):399-402. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(89)90585-4.

Tonic and baroreflex effects on arterial pressure and ventilation of 
pentobarbital and nicotine on the rat ventral medullary surface.

Jung R(1)
 Bruce EN, Katona PG.
Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Engineering, School of Engineering, Case Western 
Reserve University, Cleveland, OH 44106.
Unilateral aortic depressor nerve stimulation caused depression of arterial 
pressure (baropressure reflex) and ventilation (baro-ventilatory reflex) in 
urethane-anesthetized, spontaneously breathing Sprague-Dawley rats.
Application 
of sodium pentobarbital to the ventral medullary surface (VMS) depressed 
baseline arterial pressure and ventilation, and attenuated the baro-pressure 
reflex, but not the baro-ventilatory reflex.
Application of nicotine on the VMS 
decreased baseline arterial pressure and increased ventilation, but left both 
baro-pressure and baro-ventilatory reflexes unaltered.
The results suggest that 
some of the structures that affect vasomotor tone may not be involved in the 
baroreflex inhibition of arterial pressure.
Additionally, neither the neural 
structures near the VMS which modulate CO2 control of ventilation, nor those 
that affect tonic control of vasomotor tone are likely to be significantly 
involved in the baro-ventilatory reflex.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(89)90585-4
PMID: 2720421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The hemodynamic effects of γ2-melanocyte-stimulating hormone and related melanotropins depend on the arousal potential of the rat 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1993 Mar 16;233(1):157-64. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(93)90362-l.

The hemodynamic effects of gamma 2-melanocyte-stimulating hormone and related 
melanotropins depend on the arousal potential of the rat.

De Wildt DJ(1)
 Krugers H, Kasbergen CM, De Lang H, Versteeg DH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Pharmacology, Rudolf Magnus Institute, Medical Faculty, 
Utrecht University, Netherlands.
In conscious rats, i.v.
administered adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH-(4-10)) 
and gamma 2-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (gamma 2-MSH) induced a 
dose-dependent increase in blood pressure (BP), heart rate (HR) and pulse 
pressure (PP).
No circadian influence on these effects was observed.
The 
structurally related peptide, alpha-melanocyte-stimulating hormone (alpha-MSH), 
only caused an increase in HR, which was not dose-dependent, whereas the stable 
ACTH-(4-9) analog, Org 2766, was without effect on these hemodynamic parameters.
In rats under light urethane-induced anesthesia, which is known to maintain 
reflexes and sufficient sympathetic tone, gamma 2-MSH caused hemodynamic 
responses similar to those observed in conscious rats.
In contrast, gamma 2-MSH 
had an opposite effect in rats under deep pentobarbital-induced anesthesia: a 
depressor effect combined with a slight bradycardia.
A comparative study with 
rats of a more arousable Wistar rat substrain (Riv:TOX) and of a less excitable 
rat substrain (U:WU) showed that the dose-pressor response curves for 
ACTH-(4-10) and gamma 2-MSH were shifted to the left in the more excitable rats 
as compared to the in the less excitable rats.
We conclude that a restricted 
amino acid sequence in the N-terminal part of the pro-opiomelanocortin 
(POMC)-molecule (gamma 2-MSH/ACTH-(4-10)-like) is responsible for the 
stimulating effects on the cardiovascular system and that those effects are 
strongly dependent on the state of arousal, i.e.
sympathetic tone, of the rat.
These stimulatory effects override a depressor phenomenon which can only be 
detected during central depression.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(93)90362-l
PMID: 8386086 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Power of posthypophyseal preparations partially to reestablish the hypertensive action of hordenine first suppressed by adrenolytics]. 1. C R Seances Soc Biol Fil. 1972;166(11):1433-5.

[Power of posthypophyseal preparations partially to reestablish the hypertensive 
action of hordenine first suppressed by adrenolytics].

[Article in French]

Hazard R
 Renier-Cornec A.

PMID: 4667356 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Seasonality of dihydropyridine receptor binding in the heart of an anoxia-tolerant vertebrate
 the crucian carp (<i>Carassius carassius</i>L.)
<jats:p>Prolonged anoxia tolerance of facultative anaerobes is based on metabolic depression and thus on controlled reduction of energy-utilizing processes.
One proposed survival mechanism is the closing of ion channels to decrease energetic cost of ion pumping (Hochachka PW.
Science 231: 234–241, 1986).
To test this hypothesis, the involvement of L-type Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>channels in seasonal anoxia tolerance of the vertebrate heart was examined by determining the number of [ methyl-<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]PN200–110 (a ligand of L-type Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>channel α-subunit) binding sites of the cardiac tissue and the density of Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>current in ventricular myocytes of an anoxia-resistant fish species, the crucian carp.
In their natural environment, the fish were exposed for &gt;3 mo of hypoxia (O<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>&lt;2.5 mg/l) followed by almost 8 wk of anoxia that resulted in abrupt depletion of cardiac glycogen stores in late spring.
Unexpectedly, however, the number of [ methyl-<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]PN200–110 binding sites did not decline in hypoxia/anoxia as predicted by the channel arrest hypothesis but remained constant for most of the year.
However, in early summer, the number of [ methyl-<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]PN200–110 binding sites doubled for a period of ∼2 mo, which functionally appeared as a 74% larger Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>current density.
Thus the anoxia tolerance of the carp heart cannot be based on downregulation of Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>channel units in myocytes but is likely to depend on suppressed heart rate, i.e., regulation of the heart at the systemic level, and direct depressive effects of low temperature on Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>current to achieve savings in cardiac work load and ion pumping.
The summer peak in the number of functional Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>channels indicates a short period of high cardiac activity possibly associated with reproduction and active perfusion of tissues after the winter stresses.</jats:p>
DEPRESSION OF DRUG METABOLISM IN THE MOUSE BY A COMBINATION OF <i>Mycobacterium butyricum</i> AND ANAESTHETICS <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Subcutaneous injection of <jats:italic>Mycobacterium butyricum</jats:italic> suspended in mineral oil into the mouse hind paw caused an oedematous local inflammation. Hind paw swelling was maximum 5 days after injection and was still apparent at day 30.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Drug metabolism <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> (as monitored by ketamine‐ or pentobarbitone‐induced sleeping times) was not affected by the inflammatory disease. However
 administration of ketamine or pentobarbitone at day 1 led to significantly elevated sleeping times when the mice showing local inflammation were retested at day 5 with the anaesthetics.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Indomethacin inhibited hind paw oedema in the mouse but did not affect <jats:italic>ketzmine‐Mycobacter‐ium butyricum‐induced</jats:italic> depression of drug metabolism.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Prolongation of ketamine‐induced anaesthesia by combination with <jats:italic>Mycobacterium butyricum</jats:italic> at day 5 correlated with the degree of hind paw inflammation at this time.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The data suggest that anaesthetics (i.e., ketamine and pentobarbitone) may sensitize hepatic membranes to the effect of <jats:italic>Mycobacterium butyricum</jats:italic> or some toxic compound elaborated during the active phase of inflammation.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
[The characteristics of the effect of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine and its structural fragments on the lipid peroxidation of biological membranes]. 1. Nauchnye Doki Vyss Shkoly Biol Nauki. 1991;(9):21-7.

[The characteristics of the effect of dipalmitoylphosphatidylcholine and its 
structural fragments on the lipid peroxidation of biological membranes].

[Article in Russian]

Burlakov EB
 Aristarkhova SA, Fedorova LV, Sheludchenko NI, Shishkina LN.
The effect of dipalmitoyl phosphatidylcholine (DPPC) and its structural 
fragments--phosphatidic acid (PA) and choline chloride--on the 
ascorbate-dependent mice liver microsomal lipid peroxidation (LP) has been 
studied at the different LP rate.
At DPPC, PA and choline chloride introduction 
into the incubation medium before the onset of peroxidation induction DPPC 
causes the more considerable inhibition of LP than PA each separate fragment.
The inhibition effect of DPPC is lower than PA or choline chloride when DPPC, PA 
and choline chloride added on the background of developing process of 
peroxidation (e.i.
after LP induction).
A specific regulatory role of PC in the 
normal cell membrane LP process and during pathologic development is under 
discussion.
PMID: 1751614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Intestinal absorption of glucose from isolated mice jejunal loops in vivo: effect of different derivatives of tetracyclines. 1. Indian J Exp Biol. 1977 Jun;15(6):452-4.

Intestinal absorption of glucose from isolated mice jejunal loops in vivo: 
effect of different derivatives of tetracyclines.

Dutta S
 Basu PS, Banerjee S.

PMID: 598875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The level of GABA in the brain and locomotor behavior 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1975 Jul-Aug;3(4):573-8. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(75)90175-6.

The level of GABA in the brain and locomotor behavior.

Grimm V
 Gottesfeld Z, Wassermann I, Samuel D.

GABA content was measured in the brains of animals injected with AOAA, DPA or 
Saline.
Significant increases in GABA were found in the motor cortex and 
cerebellum after treatment with both drugs as compared to saline injected 
controls.
Increased GABA levels were associated with interference with the 
smooth execution of locomotor acts, especially where balancing and coordination 
of the hind limbs were necessary.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(75)90175-6
PMID: 1103159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Healthier arteries
 clearer thinking.
What you do for your heart pays off for your brain and memory.
1.
Heart Advis.
2005 Mar;8(3):1, 7.
Healthier arteries, clearer thinking.
What you do for your heart pays off for 
your brain and memory.
[No authors listed]

PMID: 15895493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
ENHANCEMENT BY AN ANTAGONIST OF TRANSMITTER RELEASE FROM FROG MOTOR NERVE TERMINALS <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The effect of Ba<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> on the synchronous release of acetylcholine from frog motor nerve terminals was studied by conventional electrophysiological techniques.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>When Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> and Ba<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> were the only divalent cations in the bathing fluid
 Ba<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> caused a presynaptic reduction in the amplitude of the endplate potential (e.p.p.).
This effect was surmountable by increasing the Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> concentration.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The affinity constant <jats:italic>(K<jats:sub>A</jats:sub>)</jats:italic> for Ba<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>, calculated on the assumption that Ba<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> is a competitive inhibitor of the agonist, Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>, was 1.1 + 0.4 mM<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> (mean + s.e.mean, <jats:italic>n</jats:italic> = 8).</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>When e.p.ps were depressed by the addition of 1 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc> Mg<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>, addition of Ba<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> (1 to 3 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>) caused either a further presynaptic depression of moderate magnitude or had no additional effect.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>When e.p.p.s were depressed with [Mg<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>] &gt; 2 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>, addition of Ba<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> &gt; 0.9 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc> enhanced the e.p.p.
amplitude by a presynaptic mechanism.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The interaction of the divalent cation antagonists Mg<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> and Ba<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> with the agonist, Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> is discussed.
It is demonstrated that a model which considers the nonequilibrium, kinetic properties of binding can be used to describe interactions between divalent cations at the external surface of the motor nerve ending.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Chronobiological disturbances with hyperthermia and hypercortisolism induced by chronic mild stress in rats 1. Behav Brain Res. 2006 Oct 16;173(2):326-30. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.06.038.
Epub  2006 Aug 14.

Chronobiological disturbances with hyperthermia and hypercortisolism induced by 
chronic mild stress in rats.

Ushijima K(1)
 Morikawa T, To H, Higuchi S, Ohdo S.

Author information:
(1)Clinical Pharmacokinetics, Division of Clinical Pharmacy, Department of 
Medico-pharmaceutical Sciences, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Kyushu 
University, 3-1-1, Maidashi, Higashi-ku, Fukuoka 812-8582, Japan.
ushijima-kentarou@umin.ac.jp

The chronic mild stress (CMS) model has been established as a realistic model of 
depressive disorder as it simulates anhedonia.
In the present study, the 
consumption of sucrose solution was decreased in the rats exposed to CMS, which 
coincided with many published studies.
Since depression is a multifaceted 
disorder, and a number of symptoms may be present, including circadian rhythm 
disturbances, we attempted to find the chronobiological abnormalities in CMS 
rats.
After 4-week of the stress procedure, the rhythmic pattern of rectal 
temperature in the CMS group was extinguished.
In particular, the temperature in 
the CMS group in the light phase was significantly higher than that in the 
control group.
The plasma corticosterone levels in the CMS group were remarkably 
increased in the light phase compared to the control group, but not in the dark 
phase.
It was concluded that the CMS procedure caused the disturbance of 
circadian rhythms with hyperthermia and hypercortisolism.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.06.038
PMID: 16904763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
7-Oxa-13-prostynoic acid and polyphloretin phosphate as non-specific antagonists of the stimulatory effects of different agents on adenylate cyclase from various tissues 1. Prostaglandins. 1975 Dec;10(6):971-81. doi: 10.1016/s0090-6980(75)80044-x.

7-oxa-13-prostynoic acid and polyphloretin phosphate as non-specific antagonists 
of the stimulatory effects of different agents on adenylate cyclase from various 
tissues.

Hynie S
 Ceplík J, Cernohorský M, Klenerová V, Skrivanová J, Wenke M.

7-oxa-13-prostynoic acid (OPA) and polyphloretin phosphate (PPP) are believed to 
act as specific antagonists of prostaglandin action.
In order to estimate their 
specificity, the inhibitory effects of these drugs were tested on the activity 
of adenylate cyclase from several tissues which were stimulated by 
prostaglandins and several other compounds.
In adenylate cyclase preparation 
from L-fibroblasts both OPA (0.15-1.5 MM) and PPP (0.01-1.0 MG/ML) antagonized 
not only the stimulatory effects of PGE but also the stimulatory effects of 
sodium fluoride and increased enzyme activity due to the previous treatment of 
cell cultures by cholera toxin.
Both OPA and PPP produced a dose dependent 
depression of adenylate cyclase activity to zero values both under basal 
conditions and after stimulation by sodium fluoride and various hormones in all 
preparations studied, including rat liver, heart, brain, epididymal adipose 
tissue, small intestine, renal cortex and renal medulla.
The present results 
indicate that both prostaglandin antagonists may, in higher concentrations, act 
as nonspecific inhibitors of the catalytic unit of adenylate cyclase rather than 
specific antagonists of the prostaglandin effects on adenylate cyclase.
DOI: 10.1016/s0090-6980(75)80044-x
PMID: 1239793 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cortical spreading depression and memory transfer: A reply to mayes 1. Behav Biol. 1977 Jun;20(2):275-80. doi: 10.1016/s0091-6773(77)90864-1.

Cortical spreading depression and memory transfer: a reply to Mayes.

Petrinovich L
 Crow TJ.
DOI: 10.1016/s0091-6773(77)90864-1
PMID: 901360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Genetic animal models of depression and ethanol preference provide support for cholinergic and serotonergic involvement in depression and alcoholism 1. Biol Psychiatry. 1992 May 1;31(9):919-36. doi: 10.1016/0006-3223(92)90118-j.

Genetic animal models of depression and ethanol preference provide support for 
cholinergic and serotonergic involvement in depression and alcoholism.

Overstreet DH(1)
 Rezvani AH, Janowsky DS.
Author information:
(1)Skipper Bowles Center for Alcohol Studies, University of North Carolina 
School of Medicine, Chapel Hill 27599-7175.
The present article summarizes some comparative studies of the Fawn-Hooded (FH) 
rat, a potential animal model of ethanol preference, and the Flinders Sensitive 
Line (FSL) rat, a potential animal model of depression.
Both FH and FSL rats 
exhibit high degrees of immobility in the forced swim test and have difficulty 
learning a two-way active avoidance task.
However, there were no differences 
between the FH and FSL rats in the elevated plus maze.
Studies of ethanol 
preference indicated high rates of ethanol intake (greater than 4 g/kg) and 
preference (greater than 50%) in the FH rats, but low rates of ethanol intake 
(less than 1.1 g/kg) and preference (less than 20%) in FSL rats.
It is concluded 
that the FSL rats exhibit behaviors consistent with their being an animal model 
of depression, whereas the FH rats exhibit features consistent with their being 
an animal model of both depression and alcoholism.
Psychopharmacological 
challenges indicated that both FSL and FH rats were more sensitive to the 
hypothermic effects of oxotremorine, a muscarinic agonist.
However, FSL rats 
were also more sensitive to serotonergic agonists, and some of the present 
results and other investigators have reported serotonergic subsensitivity in the 
FH rats.
Thus, FSL rats exhibit both cholinergic and serotonergic 
supersensitivity, whereas FH rats exhibit cholinergic supersensitivity but 
normal or reduced serotonergic sensitivity.
Progeny from a genetic cross between 
FH and FSL rats exhibit cholinergic supersensitivity and have high ethanol 
preference scores.
These data are consistent with genetic models suggesting that 
ethanol preference may be influenced by dominant genes, whereas cholinergic 
sensitivity may be influenced by recessive genes.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-3223(92)90118-j
PMID: 1386257 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Vishweshwaraiah Iron Steel Limited (VISL) fire disasters following steel converter blast
 30 July 2003 1.
Burns.
2010 Feb;36(1):135-8. doi: 10.1016/j.burns.2009.04.029.
Epub 2009 Aug
19.
Vishweshwaraiah Iron Steel Limited (VISL) fire disasters following steel 
converter blast, 30 July 2003.
Kumar P(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Burns and Plastic Surgery, Kasturba Medical College, Manipal 
576 104, Karnataka, India.
pkumar86@hotmail.com

A fire disaster occurred in Vishweshwaraiah Iron Steel Limited (VISL), 
Bhadravathi, India on 30 July 2003.
The steel converter containing 24,000 kg of 
liquid metal (pig iron) at very high temperature exploded.
A total of 30 workers 
became victims.
Seven persons died on the spot.
Twenty-three victims were 
transferred to the VISL hospital; of these, six were transferred to the burns 
unit of the Kasturba Hospital, Manipal (180 km from VISL).
All six treated at 
the burns unit suffered 3-65% total body surface area (TBSA) burn, two had 
external injuries and two had eye involvement.
Out of the six patients admitted 
at the burns unit, two expired (one due to refractory shock and another due to 
pulmonary embolism).
Out of four survivors, one underwent tangential excision; 
another underwent operation for removal of foreign body from both soles and the 
remaining two were managed conservatively.
Of the four survivors, two who had 
eye injuries, one developed minute corneal opacities within 2 months.
The total 
duration of hospital stay of survivors at the burns unit varied from 8 to 43 
days.
All the victims were counselled by VISL psychiatrists before resuming 
their duties.
Except the one who developed mixed anxiety-depression disorder, 
all survivors returned to work.
The article describes the mechanism of the 
incident, injuries sustained and suggestions in relation to future safety 
measures.
Copyright (c) 2009 Elsevier Ltd and ISBI.
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.burns.2009.04.029
PMID: 19695784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Bone conducted vibration activates the vestibulo-ocular reflex in the guinea pig 1. Brain Res Bull. 2011 Aug 10;86(1-2):74-81. doi: 
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.06.013. Epub 2011 Jul 1.

Bone conducted vibration activates the vestibulo-ocular reflex in the guinea 
pig.

Vulovic V(1)
 Curthoys IS.
Author information:
(1)Vestibular Research Laboratory School of Psychology, University of Sydney, 
NSW, Australia.
The aim of the study was: (a) to test whether short duration (6 ms) 500 Hz 
bone-conducted vibration (BCV) of the skull in alert head free guinea pigs would 
elicit eye movements; (b) to test whether these eye movements were vestibular in 
origin; and (c) to determine whether they corresponded to human eye movements to 
such stimuli.
In this way we sought to establish the guinea pig as an acceptable 
model for testing the mechanism of the effect BCV on the vestibulo-ocular 
reflex.
Consistent short-latency stimulus-locked responses to BCV were observed.
The magnitude of eye displacement was directly related to stimulus intensity as 
recorded by accelerometers cemented onto the animal's skull.
The strongest and 
most consistent response component was intorsion of both eyes.
In lateral-eyed 
animals intorsion is produced by the combined contraction of the inferior rectus 
and superior oblique muscles.
In humans the same pair of muscles acts to cause 
depression of the eye.
To test whether the movements were vestibular we 
selectively ablated the vestibular endorgans: 3 of the 8 animals underwent a 
bilateral intratympanic injection of gentamicin, an ototoxic aminoglycoside 
antibiotic, to ablate their vestibular receptors.
After ablation there was an 
overall reduction in the magnitude of eye displacement, as well as a reduction 
in the effectiveness of the BCV stimulus to elicit eye movements.
The animals' 
hearing, as measured by the threshold for auditory brainstem responses, remained 
unchanged after gentamicin, confirming that the cochlea was not affected.
The 
reduced magnitude of responses after vestibular receptor ablation demonstrates 
that the eye-movement responses to BCV are probably caused by the stimulation of 
vestibular receptors, which in turn activate the vestibulo-ocular reflex.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2011.06.013
PMID: 21745548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression of Nociceptive Sensory Activity in the Rat Spinal Cord Due to the Intrathecal Administration of Drugs: Effect of Diazepam <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:sec>
                  <jats:title />
                  <jats:p>The intrathecal (i.t.) administration of morphine inhibits nociceptive motor responses and activity in ascending axons evoked by stimulation of nociceptive afferent nerve fibers (nociceptive sensory response) in the rat. The i.t. administration of cholecystokinin octapeptide and ceruletide inhibits nociceptive motor responses
 but does not affect ascending nociceptive activity.
This shows that drug-induced depression of nociceptive motor responses is not always associated with depression of the nociceptive sensory response of the spinal cord.
The microiontophoretic application of substance P excites single dorsal horn neurons that respond to noxious stimulation, whereas the i.t.
administration of substance P inhibits both nociceptive motor and sensory responses.
Thus, the results obtained from the i.t.
administration of a drug may differ from those obtained from its application to single spinal neurons.
Diazepam inhibits spinal reflexes and may reduce pain sensation in humans.
To assess whether a spinal action is involved in the pain-relieving effect of diazepam, experiments were carried out on spinalized rats in which activity evoked by the stimulation of nociceptive and nonnociceptive afferent nerve fibers of the sural nerve was recorded from single ascending axons below the site of spinal cord transection.
Diazepam, 20 ųg i.t., reduced activity evoked by afferent A delta and C fiber stimulation and by stimulation of afferent A beta fibers.
The depressant effect caused by diazepam, 2 mg/kg i.v., on C fiber-evoked ascending activity was reduced by the i.t.
injection of the benzodiazepine antagonist, Ro 15-1788 (40 ųg), an imidazodiazepine.
It is concluded that the depression by diazepam of C fiber-evoked ascending activity contributes to pain relief caused by the drug.</jats:p>
               </jats:sec>
The pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-18 impairs long-term potentiation and NMDA receptor-mediated transmission in the rat hippocampus in vitro 1. Neuroscience. 2001;108(1):83-90. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(01)00405-5.

The pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-18 impairs long-term potentiation and 
NMDA receptor-mediated transmission in the rat hippocampus in vitro.

Curran B(1)
 O'Connor JJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Physiology, Conway Institute of Biomolecular 
and Biomedical Research, National University of Ireland, Dublin.
The effects of the pro-inflammatory cytokine interleukin-18 (IL-18) were 
investigated on both normal and isolated N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor-mediated field excitatory post synaptic potentials (fEPSP) and on the 
induction of long-term potentiation (LTP) in the rat dentate gyrus in vitro.
Bath perfusion with IL-18 (100 ng/ml) for 20 min prior to high-frequency 
stimulation had no significant effect on baseline synaptic transmission or 
paired pulse depression, but did impair the induction of LTP (115.7+/-8.8% 
versus 150.8+/-8.1% in vehicle control slices, n=6, P<0.05 at 60 min).
Further 
analysis demonstrated that IL-18 significantly depressed the amplitude of 
pharmacologically isolated NMDA receptor-mediated fEPSP (NMDA-fEPSP; 77.4+/-4.3% 
of baseline compared to controls at 1 h; P<0.05, n=7), an effect that may 
underlie the impairment of LTP by IL-18.
This action of IL-18 on LTP and 
NMDA-fEPSPs was attenuated in full by pretreatment of slices with exogenously 
applied IL-1 receptor antagonist (IL-1ra, 100 ng/ml), the naturally occurring 
antagonist of IL-1 type 1 receptors.
This ability of IL-1ra to block the 
inhibitory effects of IL-18 is likely to be receptor-specific as no reversal of 
the tumour necrosis factor-alpha-induced inhibition of LTP was seen with IL-1ra 
administration (110.7+/-5.4% versus tumour necrosis factor-alpha-treated slices; 
107.4+/-8.7%, P=0.6, n=6).
These are the first experiments providing evidence of 
a direct neuromodulatory role for IL-18 in synaptic plasticity.
DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4522(01)00405-5
PMID: 11738133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Competitive study of the effects of naloxone and of almitrine on fentanyl analgesia in the anesthetized dog: effects on the muzzle opening reflex and blood gases]. 1. Ann Anesthesiol Fr. 1980;21(4):421-30.

[Competitive study of the effects of naloxone and of almitrine on fentanyl 
analgesia in the anesthetized dog: effects on the muzzle opening reflex and 
blood gases].

[Article in French]

Dauthier C
 Gaudy JH, Willer JC.
The search for a technique making it possible to dissociate the analgesia and 
ventilatory depression of central analgesics led to a comparison of the effects 
of naloxone, a specific morphinomimetic antagonist, with almitrine, a 
ventilatory stimulant with a peripheral action, on muzzle opening reflex and 
blood gases.
Five male dogs (Beagles, aged one year), anaesthetised with 
Alfetesine were treated separately with the two drugs used alone and after 
fentanyl analgesia (injection of fractionnated doses up to the threshold of 
apnoea).
The association of the two drugs was also tested in tyhe dog after 
analgesia.
The parameters studied were muzzle opening reflex, as an indication 
of analgesia, and blood gases, and were observed for 45 minutes, including 15 
minutes control.
RESULTS: 1 - The intravenous injection of 1,2 mg of naloxone had the effect of 
increasing the surface area of muscle potentials with a maximum of 7 per cent (p 
0.001) at the 15 th minute.
By contrast, no significant change in blood gases 
was seen.
In the same dogs given fentanyl analgesia, naloxone not only reversed 
respiratory depression but had a stimulatory effect on MOR reaching 7 per cent 
(p 0.001) at the 30 th minute.
2 - The effects of 1 mg.kg-1 of almitrine were 
characterised by a fall in MOR for a period equal to that of the study and a 
minimum of 7.8 per cent (p 0.001) at the 20 th minute.
At the same time, marked 
ventilatory stimulation was seen.
PO2 rose by 22.7 per cent (p 0.02) at the 5 th 
minute.
PCO2 fell during the 30 minutes studied with a minimum of 39.6 per cent 
(p 0.01) at the 20 th minute.
Almitrine did not antagonise the depression of MOR 
caused by fentanyl but reversed the respiratory depression of the analgesic, 
increasing PO2 by 26 per cent (p 0.01) and decreasing PCO2 by 25.7 per cent (p 
0.01).
3 - The combination of both drugs cancelled out the abolition of the 
reflex by fentanyl then facilitated it up to 24.7 per cent (p 0.001) in 
comparison with the animal not receiving any analgesic.
By contrast, the 
ventilatory action of almitrine was not potentialised by naloxone.
In view of 
these data, and in the absence of any emergency, the choice of naloxone as an 
antagonist of ventilatory depression of central analgesics should not be 
preferential in order to avoid the rebound effect.
PMID: 6110396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Comparison of cardiac actions of doxorubicin
 pirarubicin and aclarubicin in isolated guinea-pig heart 1.
Eur J Pharmacol.
1993 Apr 6;234(2-3):173-81. doi:
10.1016/0014-2999(93)90951-d.
Comparison of cardiac actions of doxorubicin, pirarubicin and aclarubicin in 
isolated guinea-pig heart.
Temma K(1), Akera T, Chugun A, Kondo H, Hagane K, Hirano S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pharmacology, School of Veterinary Medicine and 
Animal Sciences, Kitasato University, Aomori, Japan.
The cardiac actions of doxorubicin were compared with those of pirarubicin and 
aclarubicin to understand the mechanisms responsible for differences in 
cardiotoxic effects of anthracycline agents.
In left atrial muscle preparations 
obtained from guinea-pig heart and stimulated at 2 Hz, anthracyclines produced 
positive inotropic effects.
The magnitude of the effect was pirarubicin > 
doxorubicin > aclarubicin.
The order for depression of potentiated postrest 
contraction and prolongation of the time to peak twitch tension was doxorubicin 
> pirarubicin > aclarubicin.
Drug washout following a 2-h incubation with 100 
microM doxorubicin prevented a further increase in the time to peak twitch 
tension, caused a marked recovery of depressed potentiated postrest 
contractions, and augmented the positive inotropic effect.
Pirarubicin and 
doxorubicin, but not aclarubicin, caused a parallel rightward shift of the 
dose-response curve for the negative inotropic effect of acetylcholine.
The 
potency of inhibition of [3H]quinuclidinyl benzilate binding was pirarubicin > 
doxorubicin > aclarubicin.
These results indicate that three anthracycline 
anticancer agents share similar effects on cardiac muscle contractility and on 
muscarinic acetylcholine receptors.
The actions of aclarubicin were weak 
compared to those of doxorubicin or pirarubicin.
Increases in the time to peak 
twitch tension and the depression of potentiated postrest contraction are 
apparently mediated by mechanisms different from those responsible for the 
positive inotropic effects or antagonism at muscarinic acetylcholine receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(93)90951-d
PMID: 8482324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
AMPA Receptor Signaling through BRAG2 and Arf6 Critical for Long-Term Synaptic Depression 1. Neuron. 2010 Jun 10;66(5):768-80. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.05.003.

AMPA receptor signaling through BRAG2 and Arf6 critical for long-term synaptic 
depression.

Scholz R(1)
 Berberich S, Rathgeber L, Kolleker A, Köhr G, Kornau HC.
Author information:
(1)Center for Molecular Neurobiology (ZMNH), University of Hamburg, Hamburg, 
Germany.
Comment in
    Neuron.
2010 Jun 10;66(5):627-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.05.027.
Central nervous system synapses undergo activity-dependent alterations to 
support learning and memory.
Long-term depression (LTD) reflects a sustained 
reduction of the synaptic AMPA receptor content based on targeted 
clathrin-mediated endocytosis.
Here we report a current-independent form of AMPA 
receptor signaling, fundamental for LTD. We found that AMPA receptors directly 
interact via the GluA2 subunit with the synaptic protein BRAG2, which functions 
as a guanine-nucleotide exchange factor (GEF) for the coat-recruitment GTPase 
Arf6.
BRAG2-mediated catalysis, controlled by ligand-binding and tyrosine 
phosphorylation of GluA2, activates Arf6 to internalize synaptic AMPA receptors 
upon LTD induction.
Furthermore, acute blockade of the GluA2-BRAG2 interaction 
and targeted deletion of BRAG2 in mature hippocampal CA1 pyramidal neurons 
prevents LTD in CA3-to-CA1 cell synapses, irrespective of the induction pathway.
We conclude that BRAG2-mediated Arf6 activation triggered by AMPA receptors is 
the convergent step of different forms of LTD, thus providing an essential 
mechanism for the control of vesicle formation by endocytic cargo.
Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2010.05.003
PMID: 20547133 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pet Ownership and Older Women: The Relationships Among Loneliness
 Pet Attachment Support, Human Social Support, and Depressed Mood 1.
Geriatr Nurs.
2012 May-Jun;33(3):194-203. doi:
10.1016/j.gerinurse.2011.12.005.
Epub 2012 Feb 8.
Pet ownership and older women: the relationships among loneliness, pet 
attachment support, human social support, and depressed mood.
Krause-Parello CA(1).
Author information:
(1)Center for Nursing Research, Kean University, School of Nursing, College of 
Natural, Applied and Health Sciences, Union, NJ, USA.
Pets can play a positive role in the both the physical and psychological health 
of older adults.
This cross sectional study investigated the relationships among 
loneliness, pet attachment support, human social support, and depressed mood in 
a convenience sample of 159 pet-owning older women residing in the community.
Participants completed loneliness, pet attachment support, human social support, 
and depressed mood scales.
The results supported significant relationships 
between loneliness, pet attachment support, human social support, and depressed 
mood.
No relationship was found between human social support and depressed mood.
Pet attachment support, but not human social support, influenced the 
relationship between loneliness and depressed mood indicating the importance of 
pet attachment as a greater form of support in this sample.
Clinical and social 
implications for nurses working with the geriatric population were identified 
and discussed.
Copyright © 2012 Mosby, Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.gerinurse.2011.12.005
PMID: 22321806 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Regulation of testosterone biosynthesis in rat testes by 7 alpha-hydroxylated C 19 steroids. 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1971 Sep 1;239(3):482-93.

Regulation of testosterone biosynthesis in rat testes by 7 alpha-hydroxylated C 
19 steroids.

Inano H
 Tamaoki BI.
PMID: 5113505 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reactivity of chick embryo heart to cholinergic agonists during ontogenesis: decline in desensitization at the onset of cholinergic transmission. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1974 Oct;191(1):109-18.

Reactivity of chick embryo heart to cholinergic agonists during ontogenesis: 
decline in desensitization at the onset of cholinergic transmission.

Pappano AJ
 Skowronek CA.
PMID: 4371671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effects of intraventricular injections of quaternary ammonium compounds on the acetylcholine content of rat brain. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1969 Oct;181(2):253-62.

The effects of intraventricular injections of quaternary ammonium compounds on 
the acetylcholine content of rat brain.

Slater P.

PMID: 5403605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Poster Session II 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015 Dec;40 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S272-442. doi: 
10.1038/npp.2015.326.

Poster Session IITuesday
 December 8, 2015.
[No authors listed]

DOI: 10.1038/npp.2015.326
PMCID: PMC4672311
PMID: 26632287
Modulation of immunosuppression in obstructive jaundice by Tinospora cordifolia. 1. Indian J Med Res. 1989 Dec;90:478-83.

Modulation of immunosuppression in obstructive jaundice by Tinospora cordifolia.

Rege NN
 Nazareth HM, Bapat RD, Dahanukar SA.
A clinical study was undertaken to determine the immune status of patients with 
obstructive jaundice.
Screening of 16 patients for phagocytic and microbicidal 
activity of polymorphonuclear cells (PMN) revealed a significant depression 
(21.2 +/- 3.7% phagocytosis and 20.85 +/- 4.5% intracellular killing) of these 
functions, as compared to normal values (30.37 +/- 5.1% and 26.41 +/- 4.3% 
respectively).
An animal model of cholestasis was also established, using rats, 
in which a significant depression of activity of PMN and peritoneal macrophages 
was observed.
These cellular abnormalities were found to precede and predispose 
to infection.
The rats also showed an increased susceptibility to Escherichia 
coli infection (mortality rate 77.78%).
A defect was detected in their serum 
responsible for depressing the function of phagocytic cells.
An attempt was made 
to improve this immunosuppression by treating the rats with water extract of T. 
cordifolia 100 mg/kg for 7 days, following development of cholestasis.
The 
extract improved the cellular immune functions.
Mortality rate following Esch.
coli infection was significantly reduced to 16.67 per cent.
This study showed 
that cholestasis results in immunosuppression and therefore indicates the need 
for an immunomodulator in management of obstructive jaundice.
The plant T. 
cordifolia seems to meet this need by consolidating host defence mechanism.
PMID: 2697692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Forage: Concentrate on Kinetics of Forage Fiber Digestion In Vivo 1. J Dairy Sci. 1985 Jan;68(1):40-4. doi: 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(85)80795-5.

Effect of forage: concentrate on kinetics of forage fiber digestion in vivo.

Miller BG
 Muntifering RB.
With five rumen-fistulated Holstein steers in a Latin square design, we 
determined the effect of dietary concentrate (0, 20, 40, 60, or 80% cracked 
corn) on kinetic characteristics influencing forage fiber digestion in vivo.
Rate and potential extent of neutral detergent fiber degradation were determined 
for fescue hay in situ by nylon bag technique.
Rate of fiber passage from the 
rumen was measured by fecal excretion of chromium-mordanted fescue cell walls.
Apparent extent of forage fiber digestion was predicted by a model in which 
fiber disappearance from the rumen is conceptualized as the sum of two competing 
first-order processes, digestion and passage, modified further by a discrete lag 
time during which fiber passes from the rumen before digestion commences.
Stepwise multiple regression analysis revealed that potential extent of fiber 
degradation in situ was the primary determinant of depression of fiber 
digestibility as dietary concentrate increased.
Rate of digestion, rate of 
passage, and lag effects collectively accounted for a small portion of the 
depression of fiber digestibility.
DOI: 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(85)80795-5
PMID: 2984271 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Low threshold mechanical stimulation of the vagina depresses dorsal horn unit activity in the spinal cat 1. Neurosci Lett. 1983 Aug 8;38(3):257-62. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(83)90378-6.

Low threshold mechanical stimulation of the vagina depresses dorsal horn unit 
activity in the spinal cat.

Henry JL.

Low threshold (0.5-15 g) mechanical punctate stimulation of the labia and vagina 
depressed dorsal horn neurones in the cat with spinal transection at L1. Similar 
stimulation 2 mm or more from the outer margin of the labia was without effect. 
The depression was observable within 1-2 sec
 and usually required 4-6 min for 
full recovery, although a smaller more prolonged depression may also have 
occurred.
Stronger stimuli evoked greater inhibition, requiring longer times for 
recovery.
Vaginal stimulation depressed 9 of 10 sensory dorsal horn neurones 
(including non-nociceptive, wide dynamic range and nociceptive specific).
Depression included a decrease in spontaneous activity and a decrease of 
naturally elicited responses to noxious and innocuous cutaneous stimuli; 
therefore the effect is not modality related.
One unit without sensory input was 
unaffected by vaginal stimulation.
In the one case tested, vaginal stimulation 
depressed glutamate-evoked excitation, suggesting that the depression of 
naturally, elicited responses was via a postsynaptic mechanism.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(83)90378-6
PMID: 6138735 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The role of cAMP in the frequency-dependent changes in contraction of guinea-pig cardiomyocytes 1. Cardiovasc Res. 1998 Feb;37(2):532-40. doi: 10.1016/s0008-6363(97)00253-8.

The role of cAMP in the frequency-dependent changes in contraction of guinea-pig 
cardiomyocytes.

Money-Kyrle AR(1)
 Davies CH, Ranu HK, O'Gara P, Kent NS, Poole-Wilson PA, 
Harding SE.
Author information:
(1)Imperial College School of Medicine, National Heart and Lung Institute, 
London, UK.
OBJECTIVES: beta-Receptor desensitisation, low basal cAMP, and a negative 
force-frequency relationship are characteristic changes in human heart failure.
Isolated cardiomyocytes from noradrenaline-treated guinea pigs also show these 
features.
We tested the hypothesis that low basal cAMP underlies the loss of 
contractile response to increasing stimulation frequency in this model.
METHODS: Isolated cardiomyocytes were obtained from noradrenaline-treated (NA) 
and sham-operated (SHAM) guinea pigs.
They were stimulated from 0.1-2 Hz and 
contraction amplitude was monitored with a video edge-detection system.
RESULTS: NA cells had less positive amplitude-frequency responses (AFR) compared 
to SHAMs at 2 mM (P = 0.002, n = 17), or midrange Ca2+ concentrations 
(EC40-EC60) (P < 0.001, n = 13).
When the cAMP agonist, 8-CPT-cAMP (CPT, 10 
microM) or high Ca2+ (above EC75) was added to NA cells the AFR was normalised 
to that of SHAM myocytes (NA vs. SHAM P = ns).
In control experiments the cAMP 
antagonists, Rp-cAMPS (Rpc) and Rp-8-CPT-cAMPS (Rp8, 100 microM), blocked the 
positive inotropic effects of CPT at 0.5 Hz (control pD2 = 4.36 +/- 0.06, Rp8 
pD2 = 3.68 +/- 0.08, P < 0.0001), n = 6 paired).
Rpc (100 microM) completely but 
reversibly blocked the effect of maximal isoprenaline in control experiments (P 
< 0.0001).
Neither antagonist reduced the AFR compared to time-matched controls 
(P = ns, n = 6).
Blockade of SERCA2a with thapsigargin resulted in a significant 
reduction in the AFR (ANOVA P < 0.0001).
CONCLUSIONS: The results are consistent with sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) 
function being a more important determinant of the amplitude-frequency 
relationship than tonic levels of cAMP under basal conditions.
Reversal of AFR 
depression by CPT may result from stimulation of SR Ca2+ uptake.
DOI: 10.1016/s0008-6363(97)00253-8
PMID: 9614507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Successful Treatment of Uterine Torsion in a Cat with Severe Metabolic and Haemostatic Complications <jats:p> A peri-parturient fifteen-month-old female Maine Coon cat was presented with extreme weakness and depression
 profound hypovolaemia and hypothermia.
Severe hyperkalaemia, hyponatraemia and anaemia were detected.
Disseminated intravascular coagulation was suspected due to marked prolongation of activated partial thromboplastin time.
Uterine torsion was diagnosed at exploratory laparotomy.
The cat made a full recovery following ovariohysterectomy and intensive supportive therapy.
</jats:p>
Effect of eosinophil-degranulating estrogens on spleen eosinophils and white pulp/red pulp ratio 1. Agents Actions. 1990 Nov;31(3-4):249-56. doi: 10.1007/BF01997616.

Effect of eosinophil-degranulating estrogens on spleen eosinophils and white 
pulp/red pulp ratio.

Tchernitchin AN(1)
 Carter W, Soto J, Baumann P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Morphology, University of Chile Medical School, 
Santiago.
A role for eosinophils in the immune reaction has not been yet established.
Considering that these leukocytes accumulate in lymphoid organs under 
glucocorticoid stimulation, we explored the possibility that they participate in 
the depression of immune reactions induced by these hormones and that they 
degranulate to exert this action.
In this context, we investigated the dose 
effect of three estrogens on the number and degranulation of spleen red pulp 
eosinophils and on the percentage of spleen cross sectional area comprising 
white pulp.
Estradiol-17 beta or 4 (OH) estradiol-17 beta increased red pulp 
eosinophils at low doses: 2 (OH) estradiol-17 beta increased them at a very high 
dose.
The three estrogens degranulated the spleen eosinophils and decreased the 
lymphocyte containing spleen white pulp.
We propose that the decrease in white 
pulp is a response mediated by agents released from degranulating eosinophils 
under the action of estrogen.
Consequently, both estrogen-induced eosinophil 
degranulation and estrogen-induced increase in red pulp eosinophil numbers are 
conditions contributing to a decrease in white pulp volume.
All above evidence 
supports the hypothesis that eosinophils are involved in immunoregulation by 
diminishing the number of lymphocytes contained in lymphoid organs.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01997616
PMID: 2085140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Blockade of tyramine-induced responses by short-acting 2-halogenoethylamines in the rat vas deferens 1. Life Sci. 1975 Jul 15;17(2):275-81. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(75)90515-9.

Blockade of tyramine-induced responses by short-acting 2-halogenoethylamines in 
the rat vas deferens.

Lee SS
 Swamy VC.
DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(75)90515-9
PMID: 1160500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Anaesthetic Agents and Their Effect on Tissue Protein Synthesis in the Rat <jats:p>1. Rates of protein synthesis were measured
 in vivo, in lung, liver, heart and skeletal muscle of young male rats.
Groups of rats were exposed for 1 h duration to one of the following anaesthetic regimens: 1.4% halothane, 2.2% halothane, 1.4% halothane in 66% nitrous oxide, intravenous pentobarbitone (20 mg/kg) and intravenous midazolam (18 mg/kg) combined with fentanyl (2 μg/kg).
Fractional rates of protein synthesis were determined by injecting [3H]phenylalanine (150 μmol/100 g body weight)</jats:p>
               <jats:p>2.
Liver protein synthesis was depressed significantly by all regimens, except midazolam/fentanyl, by up to 37.7% of control values.
Lung protein synthesis was significantly reduced by all the anaesthetic agents by up to 30% of control rates</jats:p>
               <jats:p>3.
The effects of the anaesthetic agents on skeletal muscle and heart were small and not statistically significant</jats:p>
               <jats:p>4.
There was no evidence of ventilatory depression as manifested by changes in arterial blood gas partial pressures of CO2 and O2, except in the group treated with 2.2% halothane.</jats:p>
Neuroendocrine and behavioural responses to hyperosmolality in rats with lesions of the lateral hypothalamus made byn-methyl-d-aspartate 1. Neuroscience. 1991;45(3):625-9. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(91)90275-s.

Neuroendocrine and behavioural responses to hyperosmolality in rats with lesions 
of the lateral hypothalamus made by N-methyl-D-aspartate.

Clark JM(1)
 Clark AJ, Warne D, Rugg EL, Lightman SL, Winn P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of St Andrews, Fife, U.K.

Excitotoxic lesions of rat lateral hypothalamus produce impairments in eating 
and drinking, but not motor deficits.
However, it has not been established what 
causes these eating and drinking impairments.
In the present experiments, 
drinking, plasma osmolality and arginine-vasopressin concentration were measured 
in lateral hypothalamic-lesioned and control rats following systemic injection 
of hypertonic saline.
In response to hyperosmolality, 
N-methyl-D-aspartate-lesioned rats drank significantly less than controls but 
showed normal increases in plasma osmolality and arginine-vasopressin 
concentration.
This dissociation of neuroendocrine and behavioural responses 
suggests that the impairment of rats with excitotoxic lesions of the lateral 
hypothalamus is unrelated to physiological (as opposed to behavioural) 
mechanisms of homeostasis.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(91)90275-s
PMID: 1775237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic corticosterone injections induce a decrease of ATP levels and sustained activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in hippocampal tissues of male mice 1. Brain Res. 2008 Jan 29;1191:148-56. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.11.027. Epub 
2007 Nov 26.

Chronic corticosterone injections induce a decrease of ATP levels and sustained 
activation of AMP-activated protein kinase in hippocampal tissues of male mice.

Zhao Y(1)
 Shen J, Su H, Li B, Xing D, Du L.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department of Biological Sciences and 
Biotechnology, Tsinghua University, Beijing 100084, China.
Chronic corticosterone injections induce hippocampus tissue damage and 
depression-like behavior in rodent animals, the cause of which is not known.
Nevertheless, increasing evidence shows that adenylate kinase (AK) and 
AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) play a very important role in intracellular 
energy metabolism and are especially critical for neurons which are known to 
have very small energy reserves and narrow margin of safety between the energy 
that can be generated and the energy required for maximum activity.
Abnormalities of AK or AMPK system have detrimental effects on neurons or brain 
function especially at times of increased activity.
In this study, we 
investigated the effects of chronic corticosterone exposure on energy 
metabolism, as well as AK and AMPK in hippocampal tissues in male C57BL/6N mice.
Our results show that chronic corticosterone injection induced depression-like 
behavior in male mice, significantly decreased the energy levels and caused a 
sustained increase of AMP:ATP ratio in hippocampal tissues.
Interestingly, 
chronic corticosterone injections did not produce obvious effects on AK1 protein 
and mRNA levels, but caused a sustained activation of AMPK.
The results indicate 
that sustained AMPK activation might be a mechanism by which chronic 
corticosterone treatment causes depression-like behavior in male mice.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2007.11.027
PMID: 18164281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Activation of mTOR dependent signaling pathway is a necessary mechanism of antidepressant-like activity of zinc 1. Neuropharmacology. 2015 Dec;99:517-26. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.08.026. 
Epub 2015 Aug 19.

Activation of mTOR dependent signaling pathway is a necessary mechanism of 
antidepressant-like activity of zinc.

Szewczyk B(1)
 Pochwat B(2), Rafało A(2), Palucha-Poniewiera A(2), Domin H(2), 
Nowak G(3).
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Smetna 12, 31-343 Krakow, Poland.
Electronic address: 
szewczyk@if-pan.krakow.pl.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Smetna 12, 31-343 Krakow, Poland.
(3)Department of Neurobiology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, Smetna 12, 31-343 Krakow, Poland; Department of Pharmacobiology, 
Jagiellonian University Medical College, Medyczna 9, 30-688 Kraków, Poland.
The rapid antidepressant response to the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor 
antagonists is mediated by activation of the mammalian target of the rapamycin 
(mTOR) signaling pathway, an increase in the synthesis of synaptic proteins and 
formation of new synapses in the prefrontal cortex (PFC) of rats.
Zinc (Zn), 
which is a potent NMDA receptor antagonist, exerts antidepressant-like effects 
in screening tests and models of depression.
We focused these studies in 
investigating whether activation of the mTOR signaling pathway is also a 
necessary mechanism of the antidepressant-like activity of Zn.
We observed that 
a single injection of Zn (5 mg/kg) induced an increase in the phosphorylation of 
mTOR and p70S6K 30 min and 3 h after Zn treatment at time points when Zn 
produced also an antidepressant-like effect in the forced swim test (FST).
Furthermore, Zn administered 3 h before the decapitation increased the level of 
brain derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF), GluA1 and synapsin I.
An elevated 
level of GluA1 and synapsin I was still observed 24 h after the Zn treatment, 
although Zn did not produce any effects in the FST at that time point.
We also 
observed that pretreatment with rapamycin (mTORC1 inhibitor), LY294002 (PI3K 
inhibitor), H-89 (PKA inhibitor) and GF109203X (PKC inhibitor) blocked the 
antidepressant-like effect of Zn in FST in rats and blocks Zn-induced activation 
of mTOR signaling proteins (analyzed 30 min after Zn administration).
These 
studies indicated that the antidepressant-like activity of Zn depends on the 
activation of mTOR signaling and other signaling pathways related to 
neuroplasticity, which can indirectly modulate mTOR function.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.08.026
PMID: 26297535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Response of the Kidney of the Freshwater Rainbow Trout to True Metabolic Acidosis <jats:title>ABSTRACT</jats:title>
               <jats:p>Infusion of lactic acid into the bloodstream of trout produced a short-lived depression of blood pH and a long-lasting elevation of blood lactate. The lactate injected was distributed in a volume of 198 ml/kg. Renal excretion of lactate anion and total acid increased by approximately equal amounts during the period of high blood lactate levels
 but total renal loss over 72 h accounted for only 2% of the lactate load and 6% of the proton load.
Comparable differences in the time courses of blood lactate and pH changes occurred when lactacidosis was induced endogenously by normocapnic hypoxia.
The immediate response of the kidney was similar to that with lactic acid infusion, but there was a long-lasting (12–72+ h) elevation of urinary acid efflux that was not associated with lactate excretion.
Following hypoxia, renal excretion over 72 h accounted for 1 % of the estimated lactate load and 12-25% °f proton load.
A renal lactate threshold of 4–10 μequiv/ml prevents significant urinary lactate excretion.
The response of the trout kidney to true metabolic acidosis is similar to that of the mammalian kidney.</jats:p>
Inhibition of pulmonary prostaglandin metabolism by inhibitors of prostaglandin biotransport (probenecid and bromcresol green) 1. Prostaglandins. 1975 Oct;10(4):633-9. doi: 10.1016/s0090-6980(75)80010-4.

Inhibition of pulmonary prostaglandin metabolism by inhibitors of prostaglandin 
biotransport (probenecid and bromcresol green).

Bito LZ
 Baroody RA.
DOI: 10.1016/s0090-6980(75)80010-4
PMID: 1197792 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression of cardiac function after deep hypothermic circulatory arrest in deeply anesthetized neonatal lambs 1. J Thorac Cardiovasc Surg. 1996 Feb;111(2):359-66. doi: 
10.1016/s0022-5223(96)70445-2.

Depression of cardiac function after deep hypothermic circulatory arrest in 
deeply anesthetized neonatal lambs.

Velvis H(1)
 Hines MH, Klopfenstein HS, Berry DD, Vinten-Johansen J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Bowman Gray School of Medicine, Wake Forest 
University, Winston-Salem, N.C. 27157-1081, USA.
Cardiac dysfunction is common after neonatal cardiac operations.
Previous in 
vivo studies in neonatal animal models however, have failed to demonstrate 
decreased left ventricular function after ischemia and reperfusion.
Cardiac 
dysfunction may have been masked in these studies by increased endogenous 
catecholamine levels associated with the use of light halothane anesthesia.
Currently, neonatal cardiac operations are often performed with deep opiate 
anesthesia, which suppresses catecholamine surges and may affect functional 
recovery.
We therefore examined the recovery of left ventricular function after 
ischemia and reperfusion in neonatal lambs anesthetized with high-dose fentanyl 
citrate (450 micrograms/kg administered intravenously).
Seven intact neonatal 
lambs with open-chest preparation were instrumented with left atrial and left 
ventricular pressure transducers, left ventricular dimension crystals, and a 
flow transducer.
The lambs were cooled (< 18 degrees C) on cardiopulmonary 
bypass (22 +/- 6 minutes), exposed to deep hypothermic circulatory arrest (46 
+/- 1 minutes), and rewarmed on cardiopulmonary bypass (30 +/- 10 minutes).
Catecholamine levels and indexes of left ventricular function were determined 
before (baseline) and 30, 60, 120, 180, and 240 minutes after termination of 
cardiopulmonary bypass.
Levels of epinephrine, norepinephrine, and dopamine were 
unchanged from baseline values.
Left ventricular contractility (slope of 
end-systolic pressure-volume relationship) was depressed from baseline value 
(31.7 +/- 9.3 mm Hg/ml) at 30 minutes (15.7 +/- 6.4 mm Hg/ml) and 240 minutes 
(22.7 +/- 6.4 mm Hg/ml) but unchanged between 60 and 180 minutes.
Left 
ventricular relaxation (time constant of isovolumic relaxation) was prolonged 
from baseline value (19.0 +/- 3.0 msec) at 30 minutes (31.4 +/- 10.0 msec) and 
240 minutes (22.1 +/- 2.8 msec) but unchanged between 60 and 180 minutes.
Afterload (left ventricular end-systolic meridional wall stress) was decreased 
at 30, 60, and 240 minutes.
Indexes of global cardiac function (cardiac output, 
stroke volume), preload (end-diastolic volume), and left ventricular compliance 
(elastic constant of end-diastolic pressure-volume relationship) were unchanged 
from baseline values.
In deeply anesthetized neonatal lambs exposed to ischemia 
and reperfusion, left ventricular contractility, relaxation, and afterload are 
markedly but transiently depressed early after reperfusion and mildly depressed 
late after reperfusion.
DOI: 10.1016/s0022-5223(96)70445-2
PMID: 8583809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of risperidone and SCH 23390 on isolation-induced aggression in male mice 1. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 1998 May;8(2):95-103. doi: 
10.1016/s0924-977x(97)00051-5.

Effects of risperidone and SCH 23390 on isolation-induced aggression in male 
mice.

Rodríguez-Arias M(1)
 Miñarro J, Aguilar MA, Pinazo J, Simón VM.
Author information:
(1)Area de Psicobiología, Facultad de Psicología, Universitat de València, 
Spain.
Marta.Rodriguez@uv.es

In this study, the antiaggressive effects of risperidone and SCH 23390 have been 
explored.
Using the paradigm of isolation-induced aggression, 150 albino male 
mice of the OF1 strain were allocated to control and experimental groups which 
received three doses of risperidone (0.01, 0.05 and 0.1 mg/kg) or two doses of 
SCH 23390 (0.05 and 0.1 mg/kg).
Only the highest doses of risperidone decreased 
threat and attack behaviours but all doses significantly impaired motor 
behaviour.
SCH 23390 decreased attack with the two doses used and also produced 
significant increases in immobility.
Although both antipsychotics are 
antiaggressive, this action seems to be more specific in the case of 
risperidone.
Finally, both drugs failed to affect animals with short attack 
latency, being antiaggressive only in subjects with long attack latency, which 
suggests that these two types of animals are different in their dopamine and 
serotonin neurotransmission.
DOI: 10.1016/s0924-977x(97)00051-5
PMID: 9619687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Insight into post‐mating interactions between the sexes: relatedness suppresses productivity of singly mated female <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract</jats:bold> Post‐mating
 prefertilization inbreeding avoidance (PPIA) is well established in plants but not in animals.
Support for animal PPIA comes from sperm competition studies showing success of a male's gametes declining with his relatedness to the multiply mated female; however, such studies confound female–male and male–male interaction.
To avoid this problem, we investigated offspring productivity of singly mated <jats:italic>Drosophila melanogaster</jats:italic> females using flies from four different genetic backgrounds.
Our experiments established that intrapopulation crosses using highly related parents (within‐strain) were significantly less productive than intrapopulation crosses using unrelated individuals from the same population (between‐strain).
Furthermore, we showed that these effects were not due to inbreeding depression.
The average decrease in offspring productivity of within‐strain crosses relative to between‐strain crosses was 18.3% [nonlaboratory populations: Zimbabwe 20.3%, Riverside 11.4%, neither of which showed inbreeding depression; and temperature‐adapted laboratory populations, uncorrected (corrected) for nonsignificant inbreeding depression: 18 °C, 26.5% (24.2%) and 29 °C, 20.1% (9.5%)].
The significant reduction of within‐cross productivity demonstrates PPIA in the absence of multiple mating.</jats:p>
DIFFERENTIATION OF THE ROLES OF HISTAMINE H<sub>r</sub> AND H<sub>2</sub>‐RECEPTORS IN THE MEDIATION OF THE EFFECTS OF HISTAMINE IN THE ISOLATED WORKING HEART OF THE GUINEA‐PIG <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Differentiation of the rôles of histamine H<jats:sub>r</jats:sub> and H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>‐receptors in the mediation of the effects of histamine on the isolated working heart of the guinea‐pig was achieved through the use of histamine and selective histamine receptor agonists and antagonists.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Histamine over the dose range 10<jats:sup>−9</jats:sup>mol to 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup>mol produced dose‐related increases in sinus rate
 left intraventricular pressure (LVP)<jats:sub>max</jats:sub>, <jats:italic>LVdP/dt<jats:sub>max</jats:sub></jats:italic>, coronary flow, aortic flow, total cardiac output and external pressure‐volume work.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Dimaprit, a selective histamine H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>‐receptor agonist, produced very similar responses to histamine.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>2‐Pyridylethylamine, a selective histamine Hj‐receptor agonist, had little effect on cardiac function unless large doses were administered.
Such doses produced increases in all measured parameters.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Cimetidine, a selective histamine H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>‐receptor antagonist, antagonized the effects of histamine and dimaprit and some but not all effects of 2‐pyridylethylamine.
In the presence of cimetidine a decrease in all parameters with the exception of sinus rate was observed with both histamine and 2‐pyridylethylamine.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The selective histamine Hi‐receptor antagonist, mepyramine, had little effect on responses to all three agonists.
However, the depressant effects observed with histamine and 2‐pyridylethylamine in the presence of cimetidine were antagonized by mepyramine.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The results indicate the important rôle of the histamine H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>‐receptor in the mediation of the gross cardiac effects of histamine and also indicate that histamine H<jats:sub>x</jats:sub>‐receptors can mediate cardiac depression.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Ultrastructural evidence for a role of γ‐aminobutyric acid in mediating the effects of corticotropin‐releasing factor on the rat dorsal raphe serotonin system <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) serotonin (5‐HT) system has been implicated in acute responses to stress and in stress‐related psychiatric disorders such as anxiety and depression. Substantial findings suggest that the neuropeptide corticotropin‐releasing factor (CRF) is instrumental in modulating the activity of this system during stress. Because the DRN is neurochemically heterogeneous
 dual immunoelectron microscopy was used to examine cellular substrates for interactions between CRF and either 5‐HT or γ‐aminobutyric acid (GABA) in the dorsolateral and ventromedial DRN.
CRF immunoreactivity was identified primarily within axon terminals, where immunolabeling was particularly enriched in dense‐core vesicles.
Although CRF terminals targeted 5‐HT‐containing dendrites in the dorsolateral DRN (16%; n = 251 terminals), synaptic contacts with dendrites that lacked detectable 5‐HT immunolabeling were more numerous (48%).
In contrast, dual labeling for CRF and GABA (n = 240 terminals) in the dorsolateral DRN revealed that substantially more CRF terminals contacted GABA dendrites (42%) as opposed to unlabeled dendrites (29%).
In the ventromedial DRN, contacts between CRF axon terminals and either 5‐HT‐labeled dendrites or GABA‐containing dendrites were fewer than in the dorsolateral DRN.
As in the dorsolateral DRN, CRF terminals more frequently contacted GABA dendrites than 5‐HT dendrites (30% vs. 8%, respectively).
The findings support physiological studies suggesting that CRF has both direct and indirect effects on DRN‐5‐HT neurons and further implicate GABA as a primary mediator by which CRF and stressors alter the activity of the DRN‐5‐HT system.
J. Comp.
Neurol.
482:155–165, 2005.
© 2004 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
Studies concerning the mechanism of suppression of renin secretion by clonidine. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1975 Mar;192(3):713-21.

Studies concerning the mechanism of suppression of renin secretion by clonidine.

Reid IA
 MacDonald DM, Pachnis B, Ganong WF.
Two series of experiments were performed in anesthetized dogs to test the 
hypothesis that the suppression of renin secretion by clonidine results from a 
centrally mediated decrease in the activity in the renal sympathetic nerves.
In 
the first series, clonidine (1 mug/kg) was administered directly into the third 
ventricle of a group of dogs in which renal perfusion pressure was controlled by 
adjusting an aortic clamp.
In these animals, clonidine produced hypotension and 
bradycardia and suppressed plasma renin activity to 39 percent of the control 
value.
These changes in blood pressure and plasma renin activity were closely 
correlated.
Intraventricular clonidine produced similar alterations in blood 
pressure and heart rate in another group of dogs in which renal perfusion 
pressure was not controlled, but failed to suppress plasma renin activity.
In 
the second series of experiments, clonidine was administered intravenously in a 
dose of 30 mug/kg.
Intravenous clonidine produced a transient hypertension 
followed by hypotension, decreased heart rate and suppressed plasma renin 
activity to 49 percent of the control value.
Renal denervation reduced renin 
secretion and prevented the suppression of renin secretion produced by 
intravenous clonidine.
Thus, these data are consistent with the hypothesis that 
the suppression of renin secretion by clonidine results from a centrally 
mediated decrease in renal sympathetic neural tone.
This suppression may be 
overcome by large falls in renal perfusion pressure.
PMID: 1120965 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Evaluation of Optimum Genetic Contribution Theory to Control Inbreeding While Maximizing Genetic Response 1. Asian-Australas J Anim Sci. 2012 Mar;25(3):299-303. doi: 
10.5713/ajas.2011.11315.

Evaluation of optimum genetic contribution theory to control inbreeding while 
maximizing genetic response.

Oh SH.

Inbreeding is the mating of relatives that produce progeny having more 
homozygous alleles than non-inbred animals. Inbreeding increases numbers of 
recessive alleles
 which is often associated with decreased performance known as 
inbreeding depression.
The magnitude of inbreeding depression depends on the 
level of inbreeding in the animal.
Level of inbreeding is expressed by the 
inbreeding coefficient.
One breeding goal in livestock is uniform productivity 
while maintaining acceptable inbreeding levels, especially keeping inbreeding 
less than 20%.
However, in closed herds without the introduction of new genetic 
sources high levels of inbreeding over time are unavoidable.
One method that 
increases selection response and minimizes inbreeding is selection of 
individuals by weighting estimated breeding values with average relationships 
among individuals.
Optimum genetic contribution theory (OGC) uses relationships 
among individuals as weighting factors.
The algorithm is as follows: i) Identify 
the individual having the best EBV; ii) Calculate average relationships ( 
[Formula: see text]) between selected and candidates; iii) Select the individual 
having the best EBV adjusted for average relationships using the weighting 
factor k, [Formula: see text].
iv) Repeat process until the number of 
individuals selected equals number required.
The objective of this study was to 
compare simulated results based on OGC selection under different conditions over 
30 generations.
Individuals (n = 110) were generated for the base population 
with pseudo random numbers of N~ (0, 3), ten were assumed male, and the 
remainder female.
Each male was mated to ten females, and every female was 
assumed to have 5 progeny resulting in 500 individuals in the following 
generation.
Results showed the OGC algorithm effectively controlled inbreeding 
and maintained consistent increases in selection response.
Difference in 
breeding values between selection with OGC algorithm and by EBV only was 8%, 
however, rate of inbreeding was controlled by 47% after 20 generation.
These 
results indicate that the OGC algorithm can be used effectively in long-term 
selection programs.
DOI: 10.5713/ajas.2011.11315
PMCID: PMC4092951
PMID: 25049566
Methylglyoxal Induces Systemic Symptoms of Irritable Bowel Syndrome 1. PLoS One. 2014 Aug 26;9(8):e105307. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105307. 
eCollection 2014.

Methylglyoxal induces systemic symptoms of irritable bowel syndrome.

Zhang S(1)
 Jiao T(1), Chen Y(2), Gao N(2), Zhang L(2), Jiang M(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
(2)Department of Cadre Ward II, First Affiliated Hospital of China Medical 
University, Shenyang, China.
Patients with irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) show a wide range of symptoms 
including diarrhea, abdominal pain, changes in bowel habits, nausea, vomiting, 
headache, anxiety, depression and cognitive impairment.
Methylglyoxal has been 
proved to be a potential toxic metabolite produced by intestinal bacteria.
The 
present study was aimed at investigating the correlation between methylglyoxal 
and irritable bowel syndrome.
Rats were treated with an enema infusion of 
methylglyoxal.
Fecal water content, visceral sensitivity, behavioral tests and 
serum 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) were assessed after methylglyoxal exposure.
Our 
data showed that fecal water content was significantly higher than controls 
after methylglyoxal exposure except that of 30 mM group.
Threshold volumes on 
balloon distension decreased in the treatment groups.
All exposed rats showed 
obvious head scratching and grooming behavior and a decrease in sucrose 
preference.
The serum 5-HT values were increased in 30, 60, 90 mM groups and 
decreased in 150 mM group.
Our findings suggested that methylglyoxal could 
induce diarrhea, visceral hypersensitivity, headache as well as depression-like 
behaviors in rats, and might be the key role in triggering systemic symptoms of 
IBS.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0105307
PMCID: PMC4144894
PMID: 25157984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
A new perspective for schizophrenia: TAAR1 agonists reveal antipsychotic- and antidepressant-like activity
 improve cognition and control body weight 1.
Mol Psychiatry.
2013 May;18(5):543-56. doi: 10.1038/mp.2012.57.
Epub 2012 May 
29.
A new perspective for schizophrenia: TAAR1 agonists reveal antipsychotic- and 
antidepressant-like activity, improve cognition and control body weight.
Revel FG(1), Moreau JL, Pouzet B, Mory R, Bradaia A, Buchy D, Metzler V, Chaboz 
S, Groebke Zbinden K, Galley G, Norcross RD, Tuerck D, Bruns A, Morairty SR, 
Kilduff TS, Wallace TL, Risterucci C, Wettstein JG, Hoener MC.
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research, Pharmaceuticals Division, F. Hoffmann-La Roche, Basel, 
Switzerland.
Schizophrenia is a chronic, severe and highly complex mental illness.
Current 
treatments manage the positive symptoms, yet have minimal effects on the 
negative and cognitive symptoms, two prominent features of the disease with 
critical impact on the long-term morbidity.
In addition, antipsychotic 
treatments trigger serious side effects that precipitate treatment 
discontinuation.
Here, we show that activation of the trace amine-associated 
receptor 1 (TAAR1), a modulator of monoaminergic neurotransmission, represents a 
novel therapeutic option.
In rodents, activation of TAAR1 by two novel and 
pharmacologically distinct compounds, the full agonist RO5256390 and the partial 
agonist RO5263397, blocks psychostimulant-induced hyperactivity and produces a 
brain activation pattern reminiscent of the antipsychotic drug olanzapine, 
suggesting antipsychotic-like properties.
TAAR1 agonists do not induce catalepsy 
or weight gain; RO5263397 even reduced haloperidol-induced catalepsy and 
prevented olanzapine from increasing body weight and fat accumulation.
Finally, 
TAAR1 activation promotes vigilance in rats and shows pro-cognitive and 
antidepressant-like properties in rodent and primate models.
These data suggest 
that TAAR1 agonists may provide a novel and differentiated treatment of 
schizophrenia as compared with current medication standards: TAAR1 agonists may 
improve not only the positive symptoms but also the negative symptoms and 
cognitive deficits, without causing adverse effects such as motor impairments or 
weight gain.
DOI: 10.1038/mp.2012.57
PMID: 22641180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Regulation of Depotentiation and Long-term Potentiation in the Dentate Gyrus of Freely Moving Rats by Dopamine D2-like Receptors 1. Cereb Cortex. 2003 Feb;13(2):123-35. doi: 10.1093/cercor/13.2.123.

Regulation of depotentiation and long-term potentiation in the dentate gyrus of 
freely moving rats by dopamine D2-like receptors.

Manahan-Vaughan D(1)
 Kulla A.
Author information:
(1)Institute for Physiology of the Charité, Synaptic Plasticity Group, Humboldt 
University, Tucholskystrasse 2, 10117 Berlin, Germany.
denise.manahan-vaughan@charite.de

Dopamine receptors are significantly involved in hippocampus-based cognitive 
processes.
Whereas the involvement of D1-like receptors in hippocampal 
plasticity has been described, the role of D2-like receptors remains to be 
clarified.
Therefore, we investigated the contribution of D2-like receptors to 
synaptic transmission, long-term potentiation (LTP) and depotentiation in the 
dentate gyrus of freely moving rats.
Male Wistar rats underwent chronic 
implantation of a recording electrode in the granule cell layer, a stimulating 
electrode in the medial perforant path and a cannula in the ipsilateral cerebral 
ventricle (to enable drug administration).
The D2-like receptor agonists 
quinpirole and noraporphine dose-dependently inhibited basal synaptic 
transmission.
Agonist priming of D2-like receptors with a drug concentration 
which had no effect on synaptic transmission inhibited depotentiation but did 
not affect LTP.
The agonist effects on depotentiation were prevented by the 
D2-like antagonist remoxipride.
Remoxipride itself did not influence basal 
synaptic transmission or depotentiation.
Interestingly, 'weak' LTP (<4 h) but 
not 'strong' LTP (>24 h) was inhibited by prior application of remoxipride.
These results suggest a specific role for dopamine D2-like receptors in the 
regulation of both depotentiation and LTP in vivo and offer an important and 
novel insight as to the involvement of these receptors in processes related to 
learning and memory.
DOI: 10.1093/cercor/13.2.123
PMID: 12507943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fractalkine/CX3CL1 enhances GABA synaptic activity at serotonin neurons in the rat dorsal raphe nucleus 1. Neuroscience. 2009 Dec 15;164(3):1210-23. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.08.075. Epub 2009 Sep 10.

Fractalkine/CX3CL1 enhances GABA synaptic activity at serotonin neurons in the 
rat dorsal raphe nucleus.

Heinisch S(1)
 Kirby LG.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Center for Substance Abuse Research, 
Temple University School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, USA.
Erratum in
    Neuroscience.
2010 Feb 17;165(4):1559-60.
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) has an important role in mood regulation, 
and its dysfunction in the central nervous system (CNS) is associated with 
depression.
Reports of mood and immune disorder co-morbidities indicate that 
immune-5-HT interactions may mediate depression present in immune compromised 
disease states including HIV/AIDS, multiple sclerosis, and Parkinson's disease.
Chemokines, immune proteins that induce chemotaxis and cellular adhesion, and 
their G-protein coupled receptors distribute throughout the CNS, regulate 
neuronal patterning, and mediate neuropathology.
The purpose of this study is to 
investigate the neuroanatomical and neurophysiological relationship between the 
chemokine fractalkine/CX3CL1 and its receptor CX3CR1 with 5-HT neurons in the 
rat midbrain raphe nuclei (RN).
Immunohistochemistry was used to examine the 
colocalization of CX3CL1 or CX3CR1 with 5-HT in the RN, and whole-cell 
patch-clamp recordings in rat brain slices were used to determine the functional 
impact of CX3CL1 on 5-HT dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) neurons.
Greater than 70% of 
5-HT neurons colocalize with CX3CL1 and CX3CR1 in the RN.
CX3CL1 localizes as 
discrete puncta throughout the cytoplasm, whereas CX3CR1 concentrates to the 
perinuclear region of 5-HT neurons and exhibits microglial expression.
CX3CL1 
and CX3CR1 also colocalize with one another on individual RN cells.
Electrophysiology studies indicate a CX3CL1-mediated enhancement of spontaneous 
inhibitory postsynaptic current (sIPSC) amplitude and dose-dependent increase of 
evoked IPSC (eIPSC) amplitude without affecting eIPSC paired-pulse ratio, a 
finding observed selectively in 5-HT neurons.
CX3CL1's effect on eIPSC amplitude 
is blocked by pretreatment with an anti-CX3CL1 neutralizing antibody.
Thus, 
CX3CL1 enhances postsynaptic GABA receptor number or sensitivity on 5-HT DRN 
neurons under conditions of both spontaneous and synaptically-evoked GABA 
release.
CX3CL1 may indirectly inhibit 5-HT neurotransmission by increasing the 
sensitivity of 5-HT DRN neurons to GABA inputs.
Therapies targeting CX3CL1 may 
treat serotonin related mood disorders, including depression experienced by 
patients with compromised immune systems.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.08.075
PMCID: PMC2785445
PMID: 19748551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Gonadal Steroids on the Secretion of LH and FSH in Neonatal Rats1 1. Endocrinology. 1971 Jul;89(1):112-5. doi: 10.1210/endo-89-1-112.

Effects of gonadal steroids on the secretion of LH and FSH in neonatal rats.

Goldman BD
 Gorski RA.
DOI: 10.1210/endo-89-1-112
PMID: 5089656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Resistance to atracurium in rats with experimental inflammation: role of protein binchng <jats:p>The influence of altered protein binding on the neuromuscular effect of atracurium has been studied in rats with experimental inflammation induced by subcutaneous injection of turpentine oil.</jats:p><jats:p>Doses of atracurium ranging from 0.45 to 1.5 mg·kg<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup> were administered to control (n = 30) and to experimental inflammation induced rats (n = 30). Neuromuscular transmission was monitored by recording the twitch tension of the tibialis‐anterior muscle elicited by stimulation of the sciatic nerve. Three effect parameters were recorded: (i) intensity of the effect
 measured as percentage depression of baseline twitch tension, (ii) duration of drug action (min) and (iii) recovery time (min).</jats:p><jats:p>The dose‐intensity of the effect relationship was modelled using a sigmoid <jats:italic>E</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub> model.
The <jats:italic>ED</jats:italic><jats:sub>50</jats:sub> (effective dose eliciting 50% of the maximum effect) was significantly increased (<jats:italic>P</jats:italic>&lt;0.01) in the inflammation group as compared to the control group (0.94 vs. 0.68 mg·kg<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup>).
This change was reflected in a shift of the dose‐response curve to the right in the pretrcated rats.
For equipotent doses <jats:italic>ED</jats:italic><jats:sub>95</jats:sub> (defined as the effective dose eliciting 95% of maximum effect), no differences were found in recovery time and duration of action between the two groups of rats.
Mucoproteins levels (index of α<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>‐acid glycoprotein (AAG)) and protein binding were significantly increased in rats with experimental inflammation as compared to control rats.</jats:p><jats:p>Based on these results, altered serum protein binding of atracurium appears to be responsible, at least in part, for the resistance to atracurium.</jats:p>
Lysergic Acid Analogs: 5-Phenylnicotinamides and Nipecotamides 1. J Pharm Sci. 1973 Nov;62(11):1881-3. doi: 10.1002/jps.2600621134.

Lysergic acid analogs: 5-phenylnicotinamides and nipecotamides.

Johnson FN
 Battista SP, Reid D.

DOI: 10.1002/jps.2600621134
PMID: 4271307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Suppressive effect of valproic acid on fear conditioning induced by dopamine in the amygdala: Its verification using the microdialysis]. 1. Nihon Shinkei Seishin Yakurigaku Zasshi. 2011 Apr;31(2):77-8.

[Suppressive effect of valproic acid on fear conditioning induced by dopamine in 
the amygdala: Its verification using the microdialysis].

[Article in Japanese]

Oshibuchi H
 Ineda T, Sugawara Y, So R, Miyagi J, Tsumura H, Ishigooka J.

PMID: 21870364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adipose-derived stem cell-conditioned medium ameliorates antidepression-related behaviors in the mouse model of Alzheimer’s disease 1. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Nov 16;609:53-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.10.023. Epub 
2015 Oct 17.

Adipose-derived stem cell-conditioned medium ameliorates antidepression-related 
behaviors in the mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Yamazaki H(1)
 Jin Y(1), Tsuchiya A(1), Kanno T(1), Nishizaki T(2).
Author information:
(1)Division of Bioinformation, Department of Physiology, Hyogo College of 
Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.
(2)Division of Bioinformation, Department of Physiology, Hyogo College of 
Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.
Electronic address: tomoyuki@hyo-med.ac.jp.
The present study investigated the effect of adipose-derived stem 
cell-conditioned medium (ASC-CM) on behavioral disorders in 5xFAD transgenic 
mice, a model of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
The immobility time in the tail 
suspension and forced swim tests for 5xFAD mice was shorter than that for 
wild-type mice.
Intravenous injection with ASC-CM restored the shortened 
immobility time for 5xFAD mice to the normal levels or to an extent, being still 
persistent 4 weeks after injection.
ASC-CM significantly suppressed 
phosphorylation of Akt at Ser473 and glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK-3β) at 
Ser9 in the hypothalamus of 5xFAD mice, without affecting Tau phosphorylation, 
as compared with that for control 5xFAD mice without ASC-CM injection.
ASC-CM 
did not affect cell surface localization of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) 
receptor subunits NR1, -2A, and -2B both in the hippocampus and hypothalamus of 
5xFAD mice.
The results of the present study show that ASC-CM ameliorates 
antidepression-related behaviors in 5xFAD mice, perhaps by inhibiting Akt and 
activating GSK-3β.
Copyright © 2015.
Published by Elsevier Ireland Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.10.023
PMID: 26472709 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Intensity of respiration and the metabolism of phospholipids in isolated brain tissues of rats at various temperatures in the presence of KCN]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1975 Apr;79(4):53-5.

[Intensity of respiration and the metabolism of phospholipids in isolated brain 
tissues of rats at various temperatures in the presence of KCN].

[Article in Russian]

Gasteva SV
 Raĭze TE.
The intensity of oxygen consumption, as well as phospholipid metabolism of 
minced rat brain tissue were studied at different temperature of the incubation 
media (37 degrees, 32 degrees and 27 degrees C) without cyanide and in the media 
containing KCN (0.5 and 1.0 mM).
As shown, both parameters depended directly 
upon the incubation temperature within the range of 27 degrees-37 degrees.
KCN 
inhibited both processes, but depression of phospholipid metabolism was more 
expressed.
These data suggest that under conditions of cyanide poisoning 
phospholipid metabolism depends both on the toxic effect of KCN directly and on 
the temperature, whose reduction reinforces this effect.
PMID: 1191769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Vagus Nerve Stimulation on Serotonergic and Noradrenergic Transmission 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2006 Aug;318(2):890-8. doi: 10.1124/jpet.106.104166.
Epub  2006 May 11.

Effect of vagus nerve stimulation on serotonergic and noradrenergic 
transmission.

Dorr AE(1)
 Debonnel G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, McGill University, 1033 Pine Ave. West, Montréal, 
Québec, Canada H3A 1A1.
Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) is an antiepileptic treatment, which has recently 
shown promise as an antidepressant.
Yet, its antidepressant mechanisms of action 
are unknown.
Serotonergic [5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT, serotonin)] and 
noradrenergic [norepinephrine (NE)] systems are involved in the pathophysiology 
of depression and in the mechanisms of action of antidepressants.
The present 
study analyzes 5-HT and NE neuronal firing rates in their brainstem nuclei: the 
dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) and locus coeruleus (LC), respectively.
The basal 
firing rates in the DRN and LC were significantly increased after long-term 
treatments with VNS.
After short-term VNS treatments, firing rates were 
significantly higher for LC (at 1 h and 3 days).
As changes in their firing rate 
may have been due to altered autoreceptor sensitivities, the responses of 
autoreceptors to the acute administration of their respective agonists were 
assessed.
However, no significant difference was seen in the DRN.
No significant 
differences in dose response curves for 5-HT(1A) somatodendritic and alpha 
2-adrenergic autoreceptors were noticed between long-term VNS and controls.
VNS 
appears to have a novel mechanism of antidepressant action, enabling its 
effectiveness in treatment-resistant depression.
LC firing rates significantly 
increase earlier than the DRN basal firing.
As the LC has an excitatory 
influence on DRN, it is possible that the increased DRN firing rate is secondary 
to an initial increased LC firing rate from VNS.
DOI: 10.1124/jpet.106.104166
PMID: 16690723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reduction of calcium-independent transient outward potassium current density in DOCA salt hypertrophied rat ventricular myocytes 1. Pflugers Arch. 1994 May;427(1-2):47-55. doi: 10.1007/BF00585941.

Reduction of calcium-independent transient outward potassium current density in 
DOCA salt hypertrophied rat ventricular myocytes.

Coulombe A(1)
 Momtaz A, Richer P, Swynghedauw B, Coraboeuf E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Physiologie Cellulaire, URA CNRS 1121, Université Paris-Sud, 
Orsay, France.
Saline-drinking, left-nephrectomized rats made hypertensive by 
deoxycorticosterone acetate (DOCA) pellet implantation at the time of surgery 
develop a cardiac hypertrophy, which becomes maximal after 6-7 weeks.
The 
hypertrophy results in a marked increase in the amplitude and duration of both 
the early and the late component of the ventricular action potential plateau 
recorded in the isolated perfused rat heart.
The 4-aminopyridine(4-AP)-sensitive 
calcium-independent transient outward potassium current was markedly depressed 
in hypertrophied ventricular myocytes resulting in a highly significant decrease 
in current density (from 19.9 +/- 3.5 to 6.4 +/- 3.1 pA/pF at +60 mV).
Activation/voltage and steady-state inactivation/voltage relationships were 
moderately although non-significantly shifted towards negative potentials.
The 
steady-state outward current measured at the end of 1-s depolarizing pulses was 
not significantly changed in hypertrophied myocytes.
4-AP induced a smaller 
increase in plateau amplitude and duration in hypertrophied rather than in 
control hearts, a point that is well explained by the depression of the 
transient outward current resulting from hypertrophy.
We also demonstrated that 
a complete recovery of both cell capacitance and transient outward current 
amplitude occurs in myocytes from saline-drinking rats studied 13 weeks after 
DOCA pellet implantation, showing that hypertrophy regresses as a result of 
pellet elimination.
Several mechanisms can be involved in the observed 
phenomena, including the possibility that the expression of potassium channels 
responsible for the transient outward current is not enhanced by hypertrophy in 
contrast with what occurs in the case of calcium channels.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1007/BF00585941
PMID: 8058475 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Role of the Extracellular Signal-Regulated Kinase Signaling Pathway in Mood Modulation <jats:p>The neurobiological underpinnings of mood modulation
 molecular pathophysiology of manic-depressive illness, and therapeutic mechanism of mood stabilizers are largely unknown.
The extracellular signal-regulated kinase (ERK) pathway is activated by neurotrophins and other neuroactive chemicals to produce their effects on neuronal differentiation, survival, regeneration, and structural and functional plasticity.
We found that lithium and valproate, commonly used mood stabilizers for the treatment of manic-depressive illness, stimulated the ERK pathway in the rat hippocampus and frontal cortex.
Both drugs increased the levels of activated phospho-ERK44/42, activated phospho-ribosomal protein S6 kinase-1 (RSK1) (a substrate of ERK), phospho-CREB (cAMP response element-binding protein) and phospho-B cell lymphoma protein-2 antagonist of cell death (substrates of RSK), and BDNF.
Inhibiting the ERK pathway with the blood-brain barrier-penetrating mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAP kinase)/ERK kinase (MEK) kinase inhibitor SL327, but not with the nonblood-brain barrier-penetrating MEK inhibitor U0126, decreased immobility time and increased swimming time of rats in the forced-swim test.
SL327, but not U0126, also increased locomotion time and distance traveled in a large open field.
The behavioral changes in the open field were prevented with chronic lithium pretreatment.
SL327-induced behavioral changes are qualitatively similar to the changes induced by amphetamine, a compound that induces relapse in remitted manic patients and mood elevation in normal subjects.
These data suggest that the ERK pathway may mediate the antimanic effects of mood stabilizers.</jats:p>
Effect of electrical stimulation of A and C fibres of the aortic nerves on arterial peripheral and cerebral blood pressure. 1. Folia Biol (Krakow). 1996;44(3-4):123-9.

Effect of electrical stimulation of A and C fibres of the aortic nerves on 
arterial peripheral and cerebral blood pressure.

Schoenborn R(1)
 Dmowska M, Unkiewicz A, Modrzejewski E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Physiology, M. Curie-Skłodowska University, Lublin, 
Poland.
The effect of electrical stimulation of A and C fibres of the aortic nerves on 
arterial peripheral (PBP) and cerebral blood pressure (CBP) was studied in 12 
rabbits (New Zealand White).
The experiments have shown that selective 
stimulation of fibres A of the aortic nerves evokes every time depression of the 
arterial blood pressure in the peripheral circulation and slightly modifies 
pressure in the cerebral circulation.
Selective stimulation of fibres C of the 
aortic nerves always elicits a significant decrease in arterial blood pressure 
in the peripheral circulation, whereas in the cerebral circulation it elicits a 
small decrease or a slight increase in arterial pressure.
The obtained results 
point to a predominating role in depressor reaction of impulsation reaching the 
aortic arch through amyelic fibres C. The depressor reaction in the peripheral 
circulation is highest with simultaneous stimulation of the right and left 
aortic nerve during stimulation of both fibre A and C.

PMID: 9342937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reduced anxiety- and depression-like behaviors in Emx1 homozygous mutant mice 1. Brain Res. 2002 May 24;937(1-2):32-40. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)02461-7.

Reduced anxiety-- and depression-like behaviors in Emx1 homozygous mutant mice.

Cao BJ(1)
 Li Y.
Author information:
(1)Beckman Institute for Advanced Science and Technology, University of Illinois 
at Urbana-Champaign, 405 N. Mathews Avenue, Urbana, IL 61801, USA.
Emx1 is a mammalian homolog of the Drosophila gap gene empty spiracles (ems).
Although it has been implicated in the formation of the mouse forebrain, the 
neuronal functions of this homeobox gene remain unknown.
The restricted 
expression of Emx1 to the cerebral cortex and hippocampus suggests that it might 
play a role in emotional and other behavioral processes.
The present study 
examined the phenotypes of Emx1-deficient mice generated by gene targeting 
technology in a battery of behavioral tests with a fixed inter-trial interval of 
7 days.
Compared with their wild-type littermates, the Emx1 homozygous mutant 
mice displayed markedly lowered anxiety-like behaviors in the elevated plus maze 
and dark/light exploration tests.
Moreover, they exhibited less depressive-like 
response as indicated by the reduced duration of immobility in the forced 
swimming paradigm.
There was a trend toward reduction in prepulse inhibition of 
acoustic startle in the homozygotes.
No significant alterations in locomotor 
activity and susceptibility to pentylenetetrazol-induced seizure were found.
This behavioral profile indicates an involvement of Emx1 in the emotional 
responses of mice.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(02)02461-7
PMID: 12020859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mechanism of force inhibition by 2
3‐butanedione monoxime in rat cardiac muscle: roles of [Ca2+]i and cross‐bridge kinetics.
<jats:p>1.
We investigated the mechanism of force inhibition by 2,3‐butanedione monoxime (BDM) on rat cardiac trabeculae.
[Ca2+]i was measured by iontophoretic injection of fura‐2 salt.
Isometric force was recorded at an end‐systolic sarcomere length of 2.1‐2.2 microns.
2.
With an external [Ca2+] of 1 mM, peak twitch force was monotonically reduced with increasing [BMD]; at 5 and 20 mM [BDM], force was 35 and 1% of the control force.
In contrast, the mean peak [Ca2+]i during transients was only reduced at [BDM] &gt; or = 10 mM.
3.
The duration of the twitch was dramatically reduced by BDM in a dose‐dependent fashion with no significant change in the time course of the underlying Ca2+ transients.
The abbreviation of twitch force duration was much greater than expected for the observed reduction in peak force by this agent.
4.
The mechanism of the inhibition of force by BDM was explored by examining the relationship between twitch force and Ca2+ transients at various values of external [Ca2+].
In the presence of BDM, the steepness of the relationship between peak force and peak [Ca2+]i was reduced compared to control conditions.
As a result, significant elevation in the [Ca2+]i transient was unable to reverse the reduction in force observed in the presence of BDM.
5.
The direct inhibitory effects of BDM on the contractile system were examined using ryanodine tetani in intact trabeculae to measure the steady‐state force‐[Ca2+]i relationship.
In contrast to the effects on twitch force at 5 mM BDM, maximal force was only reduced to 71% of control.
Furthermore, the [Ca2+]i required for half‐maximal activation (Ca50) was increased while the Hill coefficient was reduced slightly by BDM.
6.
BDM dramatically slowed the rate of rise of tetanic force.
At maximal activation, the time required to reach 90% maximal force was prolonged by a factor of 3‐8 in the presence of 5 mM BDM.
This suggests that the observed reduction in twitch force and steady‐state force may result from slowed kinetics of cross‐bridge attachment, consistent with recent biochemical studies.
7.
The contribution of altered cross‐bridge kinetics to the effects of BDM was investigated using a co‐operative cross‐bridge model of the contractile system.
Changing the rate constants for cross‐bridge attachment in the model to mimic the reported biochemical effects of BDM reproduced the observed effects of BDM.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)</jats:p>
Nonsynaptic epileptogenesis in the mammalian hippocampus in vitro. II. Role of extracellular potassium <jats:p> The role of extracellular K+ (K+o) in nonsynaptic epileptogenesis induced in the CA1 area of rat hippocampal slices by lowering [Ca2]o was studied with K+-selective microelectrodes (KSMs). Extracellular field potentials and [K+]o were recorded simultaneously with 1-2 KSMs in the CA1 stratum pyramidale. In slices perfused with an oxygenated standard physiological solution (containing 2 mM Ca2+)
 base-line [K+]o was stable for several hours.
The washout of Ca2+o was accompanied by a gradual tonic rise of [K+]o. Spontaneous and stimulus-evoked maximal seizurelike events (SLEs) appeared when [K+]o was approximately 0.5 mM above the initial 5 mM base line.
These changes were reversible in normal medium.
When K+o was pressure ejected in the CA1 stratum pyramidale of spontaneously active slices, a local rise in [K+]o of approximately 0.5 mM was necessary to trigger a SLE.
A similar apparent [K+]o "threshold" was associated with SLEs evoked by electrical stimulation.
Increasing [K+] in the perfusing solution by small increments (1 mM) markedly enhanced SLEs frequency and velocity of spread and decreased the period of absolute refractoriness that succeeded each paroxysm.
Similar changes occurred during periods of transient hypoxia.
Small [K+] decreases in the perfusate had the converse effects.
Spontaneous SLEs were associated with phasic increases in [K+]o.
In simultaneous [K+]o recordings from two layers, these transients were largest (up to 3.5 mM above base line) and rose more steeply at the stratum pyramidale.
Toward the outer dendritic layers they became smaller, slower in time course, and delayed in onset.
We conclude that the main source for these [K+]o transients are the hippocampal pyramidal cell bodies, which discharge intensely during a SLE, and that excess K+o is spatially dispersed around the discharge zone of the paroxysm.
[K+]o continued to rise, though at a slower rate, throughout the course of a SLE.
Following SLE termination, [K+]o decayed slowly to base line.
The invasion of a CA1 region by a propagating SLE was preceded quite often by a slow rise in [K+]o.
A sudden transition to a steeply rising [K+]o marked the explosive recruitment of this region into the discharge zone of the spreading paroxysm.
The total (tonic and phasic) increase in [K+]o during SLEs did not surpass a maximal level of approximately 9 mM, which was the ceiling level of [K+]o in low [Ca2+]o.
However, when spreading depression occurred, [K+]o rose up to 30-40 mM for several minutes.
Spreading depression rarely appeared spontaneously despite the recurrence of SLEs, but could be provoked by repetitive electrical stimulation.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS) </jats:p>
Decreased 5-HT1A and increased 5-HT2A receptor binding after chronic corticosterone associated with a behavioural indication of depression but not anxiety 1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1997 Oct;22(7):477-91. doi: 
10.1016/s0306-4530(97)00052-8.

Decreased 5-HT1A and increased 5-HT2A receptor binding after chronic 
corticosterone associated with a behavioural indication of depression but not 
anxiety.

Fernandes C(1)
 McKittrick CR, File SE, McEwen BS.
Author information:
(1)Psychopharmacology Research Unit, UMDS Division of Pharmacology, Guy's 
Hospital, London, UK.
The effects of chronic corticosterone treatment (100 mg pellet implanted for 1 
week) were assessed in animal tests of anxiety, exploration and motor activity, 
and changes in binding to 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors, and the 5-HT transporter, 
were measured.
At the end of the week's treatment, the corticosterone 
concentration was significantly elevated and there were significant decreases in 
adrenal, thymus and body weights.
However, there were no changes in the measures 
of anxiety in the social interaction test or on trials 1 and 2 of the elevated 
plus-maze.
Also supporting a dissociation between anxiety and elevated 
corticosterone concentrations are previous findings that benzodiazepine 
withdrawal causes increased anxiety but no change in corticosteroid 
concentrations.
Therefore these two situations provide a double dissociation 
between anxiety and elevated corticosteroids.
Decreased 5-HT1A receptor binding 
in the dentate gyrus and increased 5-HT2A receptor binding in the parietal 
cortex was found following chronic corticosterone treatment.
This reciprocal 
relationship between 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptors has been proposed to be 
important in mediating depression.
The significant decreases in motor activity 
observed in all the test situations would be compatible with this proposal.
Thus 
the constellation of behavioural and biochemical changes detected after chronic 
corticosterone treatment is more pertinent to depression than anxiety.
One week 
after removal of the pellets, the behavioural and neurochemical changes had 
disappeared and the only differences to remain were decreased adrenal, thymus 
and body weights in the animals that had been treated chronically with 
corticosterone.
DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4530(97)00052-8
PMID: 9373882 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Changes of paired-pulse evoked responses during the development of epileptic activity in the hippocampus 1. J Zhejiang Univ Sci B. 2011 Sep;12(9):704-11. doi: 10.1631/jzus.B1000316.

Changes of paired-pulse evoked responses during the development of epileptic 
activity in the hippocampus.

Feng ZY(1)
 Zheng XJ, Tian C, Wang Y, Xing HY.
Author information:
(1)Ministry of Education Key Lab of Biomedical Engineering, College of 
Biomedical Engineering & Instrument Science, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou, 
China.
hnfzy@yahoo.com.cn

Dysfunction of inhibitory synaptic transmission can destroy the balance between 
excitatory and inhibitory synaptic inputs in neurons, thereby inducing epileptic 
activity.
The aim of the paper is to investigate the effects of successive 
excitatory inputs on the epileptic activity induced in the absence of 
inhibitions.
Paired-pulse orthodromic and antidromic stimulations were used to 
test the changes in the evoked responses in the hippocampus.
Picrotoxin (PTX), 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) type A (GABA(A)) receptor antagonist, was added to 
block the inhibitory synaptic transmission and to establish the epileptic model.
Extracellular evoked population spike (PS) was recorded in the CA1 region of the 
hippocampus.
The results showed that the application of PTX induced a biphasic 
change in the paired-pulse ratio of PS amplitude.
A short latency increase of 
the second PS (PS2) was later followed by a reappearance of PS2 depression.
This 
type of depression was observed in both orthodromic and antidromic paired-pulse 
responses, whereas the GABAergic PS2 depression [called paired-pulse depression 
(PPD)] during baseline recordings only appeared in orthodromic-evoked responses.
In addition, the depression duration at approximately 100 ms was consistent with 
a relative silent period observed within spontaneous burst discharges induced by 
prolonged application of PTX.
In conclusion, the neurons may ignore the 
excitatory inputs and intrinsically generate bursts during epileptic activity.
The depolarization block could be the mechanisms underlying the PPD in the 
absence of GABA(A) inhibitions.
The distinct neuronal responses to stimulations 
during different epileptic stages may implicate the different antiepileptic 
effects of electrical stimulation.
DOI: 10.1631/jzus.B1000316
PMCID: PMC3167903
PMID: 21887845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effects of endomorphin-1 on conditioned defeat in Syrian hamsters (Mesocricetus auratus) 1. Brain Res. 2001 Sep 28;914(1-2):74-80. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02775-5.

The effects of endomorphin-1 on conditioned defeat in Syrian hamsters 
(Mesocricetus auratus).

Whitten RD(1)
 Jasnow AM, Albers HE, Martin-Schild S, Zadina JE, Huhman KL.
Author information:
(1)Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, Department of Psychology, Georgia State 
University, Atlanta, GA 30303, USA.
The present study examined the effect of endomorphin-1 (EM1), an endogenous 
opioid with a high affinity for the mu opiate receptor, on conditioned defeat.
Conditioned defeat is a phenomenon in which hamsters that have been defeated 
subsequently fail to exhibit normal territorial aggression and instead display 
submissive/defensive behaviors even when paired with a non-aggressive intruder.
In experiment 1, animals were placed in the home cage of a larger resident for 
15 min and were defeated.
After 24 h, animals received a 3-microl injection of 
EM1 (0.0, 0.3, 3.0, or 10 nmol) into the left lateral cerebral ventricle 5 min 
before a smaller non-aggressive intruder was placed in the home cage of the 
experimental animal.
In experiment 2, animals were infused with EM1 immediately 
after the initial defeat and were paired with a non-aggressive intruder 24 h 
later as in experiment 1.
EM1 reduced the duration of submissive/defensive 
behavior in experiment 1 (P<0.05) but not in experiment 2 (P>0.05).
These data 
support the hypothesis that the highly selective mu receptor agonist 
endomorphin-1 modulates the expression of conditioned defeat, but provides no 
support for the hypothesis that endomorphin-1 modulates the consolidation of 
conditioned defeat.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02775-5
PMID: 11578599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
NMDA Receptor-Dependent Activation of the Small GTPase Rab5 Drives the Removal of Synaptic AMPA Receptors during Hippocampal LTD 1. Neuron. 2005 Jan 6;45(1):81-94. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.12.023.

NMDA receptor-dependent activation of the small GTPase Rab5 drives the removal 
of synaptic AMPA receptors during hippocampal LTD.

Brown TC(1)
 Tran IC, Backos DS, Esteban JA.
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Program, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI 
48109, USA.
The activity-dependent removal of AMPA receptors from synapses underlies 
long-term depression in hippocampal excitatory synapses.
In this study, we have 
investigated the role of the small GTPase Rab5 during this process.
We propose 
that Rab5 is a critical link between the signaling cascades triggered by LTD 
induction and the machinery that executes the activity-dependent removal of AMPA 
receptors.
We have found that Rab5 activation drives the specific 
internalization of synaptic AMPA receptors in a clathrin-dependent manner and 
that this activity is required for LTD. Interestingly, Rab5 does not participate 
in the constitutive cycling of AMPA receptors.
Rab5 is able to remove both GluR1 
and GluR2 AMPA receptor subunits, leading to GluR1 dephosphorylation.
Importantly, NMDA receptor-dependent LTD induction produces a rapid and 
transient increase of active (GTP bound) Rab5.
We propose a model in which 
synaptic activity leads to Rab5 activation, which in turn drives the removal of 
AMPA receptors from synapses.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2004.12.023
PMID: 15629704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Structural and functional analogs of CuZn superoxide dismutase inhibit rat brain nitric oxide synthase by interference with the reductase (diaphorase) domain 1. Neurosci Lett. 1996 May 17;209(3):169-72. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(96)12639-2.

Structural and functional analogs of CuZn superoxide dismutase inhibit rat brain 
nitric oxide synthase by interference with the reductase (diaphorase) domain.

Mayer B(1)
 Pfeiffer S, Leopold E, Müller J, Weser U, Schmidt K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Karl-Franzens-Universität Graz, 
Austria.
mayer@kfunigraz.ac.at

Copper complexes with superoxide dismutase (SOD) activity show a wide range of 
pharmacological activities.
We have investigated the effect of 
([N,N'-bis(2-pyridylmethylene)-1,4-butanediamine]-(N,N',N", 
N"')]-Cu(II)-chloride (Cu-PuPy) and 
([N,N'-bis(2-pyridyl-phenyl)methylene-1,4-butanediamine]-(N,N',N", 
N"'))-Cu(II)-chloride (Cu-PuPhePy) on the multiple catalytic functions of rat 
brain NO synthase (NOS).
Both drugs inhibited the formation of L-citrulline as 
well as the enzymatic reduction of cytochrome c. The uncoupled oxidation of 
NADPH, catalyzed by neuronal NOS in the absence of L-arginine, was inhibited by 
Cu-PuPy but stimulated by Cu-PuPhePy, suggesting that the phenyl-substituted 
compound acts as a parasitic electron acceptor.
Our data identify copper 
complexes with SOD mimicking activity as a novel class of neuronal NOS 
inhibitors blocking the reductase (diaphorase) activity of the enzyme.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(96)12639-2
PMID: 8736637 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of gastrin in bombesin-stimulated somatostatin release 1. Gastroenterology. 1990 Nov;99(5):1297-302. doi: 10.1016/0016-5085(90)91153-w.

Role of gastrin in bombesin-stimulated somatostatin release.

Guo YS(1)
 Thompson JC, Singh P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Texas Medical Branch, Galveston.
The intermediary pathways in the bombesin-induced somatostatin release were 
examined in isolated perfused rat stomach obtained from male rats that were 
fasted overnight.
The stomachs were perfused by way of the celiac artery.
On 
coinfusion of 1.0 mumol/L tetrodotoxin and 1 nmol/L bombesin, a significant 
depression in release of somatostatin was observed compared with that observed 
with bombesin alone.
The 5-minute integrated somatostatin response after 
treatment with tetrodotoxin and bombesin was 173% +/- 14% of basal, which was 
significantly lower than that observed with bombesin alone (394% +/- 59% of 
basal, P less than 0.05) but significantly higher than that observed with 
medium-199 alone (95% +/- 7% of basal, P less than 0.05); this indicated that 
approximately 70% of the bombesin-stimulated somatostatin release was indirectly 
mediated through neural pathways, while a significant (approximately 30%) 
segment of it was mediated by nonneural mechanisms.
To test if the 30% 
somatostatin release was secondary to gastrin release in response to bombesin, 
gastrin antiserum and bombesin (1 nmol/L) were coadministrated in the presence 
or absence of tetrodotoxin (1 mumol/L).
Gastrin antiserum alone did not 
significantly affect basal release of somatostatin but caused a significant 
inhibition (approximately 23%) of bombesin-provoked somatostatin release.
Coadministration of gastrin antiserum and tetrodotoxin attenuated 
bombesin-stimulated somatostatin release.
Gastrin (1 mumol/L) alone 
significantly stimulated somatostatin release (150% +/- 10% of basal), which was 
completely attenuated in the presence of gastrin antiserum.
Tetrodotoxin did not 
affect bombesin-elicited gastrin release, confirming that bombesin-stimulated 
gastrin release was directly mediated.
To determine the nature of the neural 
pathways mediating the bombesin-induced somatostatin release, atropine (100 
nmol/L) was used.
Atropine inhibited bombesin-induced somatostatin release to 
the same extent as tetrodotoxin, indicating that cholinergic pathways mediated 
bombesin-induced somatostatin release.
These results show that almost all the 
somatostatin response to bombesin is indirectly mediated, and is composed of a 
major neural (cholinergic) and a minor nonneural pathway.
The nonneural 
mechanism appears to be contributed primarily by gastrin released in response to 
bombesin, which apparently has a short paracrine positive feedback effect on 
somatostatin release.
DOI: 10.1016/0016-5085(90)91153-w
PMID: 1976561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Efficacy of Managing Postanaesthetic Respiratory Depression with Analeptics 1. Acta Anaesthesiol Scand Suppl. 1966;23:29-35. doi: 
10.1111/j.1399-6576.1966.tb00988.x.

The efficacy of managing postanaesthetic respiratory depression with analeptics.

Dobkin AB
 Su JP, Byles PH.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1399-6576.1966.tb00988.x
PMID: 4388360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Structure of the mitochondrial creatine kinase octamer: high-resolution shadowing and image averaging of single molecules and formation of linear filaments under specific staining conditions. <jats:p>The combination of high-resolution tantalum/tungsten (Ta/W) shadowing at very low specimen temperature (-250 degrees C) under ultrahigh vacuum (less than 2 x 10(-9) mbar) with circular harmonic image averaging revealed details on the surface structure of mitochondrial creatine kinase (Mi-CK) molecules with a resolution less than 2.5 nm. Mi-CK octamers exhibit a cross-like surface depression dividing the square shaped projection of 10 x 10 nm into four equally sized subdomains
 which correspond to the four dimers forming the octameric Mi-CK molecule.
By a combination of positive staining (with uranyl acetate) and heavy metal shadowing, internal structures as well as the surface relief of Mi-CK were visualized at the same time at high resolution.
Computational image analysis revealed only a single projection class of molecules, but the ability of Mi-CK to form linear filaments, as well as geometrical considerations concerning the formation of octamers by four equal, asymmetric dimers, suggest the existence of at least two distinct faces on the molecule.
By image processing of Mi-CK filaments a side view of the octamer differing from the top-bottom projections of single molecules became evident showing a funnel-like access each form the top and bottom of the octamer connected by a central channel.
The general structure of the Mi-CK octamer described here is relevant to the localization of the molecule at the inner-outer mitochondrial contact sites and to the function of Mi-CK as an "energy channeling" molecule.</jats:p>
Combined Effects of Volatile Anesthetics and Phosphodiesterase Inhibitors on Contractile Performance in Guinea Pig Hearts 1. Anesth Analg. 1991 Jul;73(1):76-82. doi: 10.1213/00000539-199107000-00014.

Combined effects of volatile anesthetics and phosphodiesterase inhibitors on 
contractile performance in guinea pig hearts.

Himmel HM(1)
 Schappert T, Ravens U.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Essen, Germany.
The cardiotonic effects of the phosphodiesterase inhibitors amrinone, milrinone, 
and 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine were studied in Langendorff-perfused guinea pig 
hearts exposed to the cardiodepressant concentrations of halothane or 
isoflurane.
Left ventricular pressure, rate of change of pressure (dP/dt), heart 
rate, and perfusion pressure were measured in the presence of increasing drug 
concentrations.
Under control conditions, both (dP/dt)max and heart rate were 
increased most with 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine and least with amrinone.
In 
isoflurane-pretreated hearts (1.3%, vol/vol), the phosphodiesterase inhibitors 
increased (dP/dt)max to a larger degree, whereas the increase in heart rate 
remained similar to that in the control hearts.
After exposure to halothane 
(0.8%, vol/vol), however, amrinone and milrinone were less effective with 
respect to enhancement of contractile performance.
There was no difference in 
the 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine-induced increase of (dP/dt)max between hearts 
exposed to isoflurane and those exposed to halothane.
Our results suggest that 
contractile performance of isolated hearts is more easily stimulated by 
milrinone and amrinone in the presence of isoflurane than in the presence of 
halothane.
DOI: 10.1213/00000539-199107000-00014
PMID: 1713427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Electroconvulsive Seizures Inhibit Amygdala Kindling: Implications for Mechanisms of Action in Affective Illness <jats:sec><jats:label /><jats:p><jats:bold>Summary: </jats:bold> Amygdala kindling
 the progressive development of seizures following repeated electrical stimulation, has been used as a model of epilepto‐genesis, neural memory, and the development of behavioral alterations.
In an attempt to interfere with the kindling process, electroconvulsive seizures (ECS) were administered 6 h prior to or immediately after once‐daily amygdala stimulation.
ECS compared with sham ECS 6 h prior to kindling profoundly inhibited the development of amygdala‐kindled seizures, while ECS immediately after the afterdischarge (AD) were not effective.
In a second study, seven daily ECS, but not a single ECS followed by a 6‐day delay, markedly suppressed established amygdala‐kindled seizures compared with sham ECS controls.
The generalized seizures of ECS thus appear to be paradoxically anticonvulsant to limbic seizures.
Carbamazepine, a potent anticonvulsant for temporal lobe and limbic seizures in animals and man, inhibits amygdala‐kindled seizures and is effective in the treatment of manic‐depressive illness.
The current findings suggest the possibility that the efficacy of ECS in affective illness may be, in part, related to its limbic antikindling and anticonvulsant effects.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>RESUMEN</jats:title><jats:p>El condicionamiento de la amígdala (kindling), es decir, el pro‐gresivo desarrollo de ataques tras la estimulación eléctrica re‐petida, ha sido usado como un modelo de epileptogénesis, me‐moria neuronal y del desarrollo de alleraciones del comporta‐miento.
En un intento de interferir con el proceso de “kindling” se administraron ataques electroconvulsivos (ECS) seis horas antes o inmediatamente despues de una estimulación amigdalina diaria.
Los ECS.
comparados con un simulacro de ECS, admin‐istrados seis horas antes del “kindling” inhibieron profunda‐mente el desarrollo de ataques de la “amígdala‐condicionada” mientras que los ECS aplicados inmediatamente después de la post‐descarga (AD) no fueron efectivos.
En un segundo estudio, siete ECS diarios, pero sin aplicar ni un solo ECS durante seis días de retraso, suprimieron claramente los ataques de la “amígdala‐condicionada.” previamente establecidos, compareándolos con el simulacro de ECS de control.
Así pues, los ataques gen‐eralizados ECS parecen ser paradójicamente anticonvulsivos de los ataques límbicos.
La carbamazepina, un potente anticonvulsive de ataques de lóbulo temporal y límbicos, en animales y humanos.
inhibe los ataques de “amígdala‐condicionada” y es eficaz en el tratamiento de enfermedades maniaco‐depresivas.
Estos hallazgos sugieren la posibilidad de que la eficacia de los ECS en enfermedades afectivas pueda estar.
en parte, relacion‐adas con sus efectos “anti‐kindling” limbico y anticonvulsivo.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>ZUSAMMENFASSUNG</jats:title><jats:p>Kindling des Amygdalons, die allmähliche Entwicklung von Anfällen als Folge wiederholter elektrischer Stimulierung wurde als Modell der Epileptogenese, des neuralen Gedächnis' und der Entwicklung von Verhaltensänderungen benutzt.
In einem Ver‐such, den Kindling Prozess zu beeinflussen, wurden elektrokon‐vulsive Krämpfe (ECS) 6 Stunden vor oder unmitlelbar nach einer täglichen Amygdalonstimulation ausgelöst.
ECS 6 Stunden vor dem Kindling verhinderte im Gegensatz zur Scheinstimula‐tion gründlich die Entwicklung von Anfällen nach Amygdalon Kindling.
Hingegen waren ECS unmittelbar nach den Nachen‐tladungen (AD) ineftektiv.
In einer 2.
Untersuchung.
in der 7 tägliche ECS angewandl wurden, nicht aber nach einem ein‐zelnen ECS, der von 6 Tagen Pause gefolgt war, wurden Amygdalon gekindelte Anfälle – verglichen mit den Schein‐ECS‐Kon‐trollen–deutlich unterdrückt.
Die generalisierten Anfälle vom Typ der ECS scheinen somil paradoxerweise gegenüber lim‐bischen Anfällen antikonvulsiv zu wirken.
Carbamazepin, ein potentes Antikonvulsivum für Temporallappen‐ und limbische Anfälle bei Tier und Mensch, inhibiert Amygdalon‐ gekindelte Anfälle und entfaltet seine Wirkung auch auf manisch‐depressive Zustände.
Die gegenwärtigen Befunde legen die Möglichkeit nahe, daß die Wirkung von ECS bei affektiven Erkrankungen teilweise in Beziehung stehen könnte zu diesen limbischen an‐tikindling und antikonvulsiven Wirkungen.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Histidinemia Produced in the Rat by Treatment with Nitromethane <jats:p>Metabolic effects of &lt;i&gt;in vivo &lt;/i&gt;administration of nitromethane
 a histidase inhibitor, were studied in the rat.
Histidinemia produced by feeding a 5-percent histidine diet to the rat was included for comparison.
Rats injected subcutaneously with nitromethane every other day appeared to be histidinemic, with a plasma histidine level of 43 &lt;i&gt;µ&lt;/i&gt;mol/100 ml (control 9.2 &lt;i&gt;µ&lt;/i&gt;mol/100 ml) after 12 days of treatment.
Histidine concentrations in the brain, liver, kidney, and urine of the nitromethane-treated rats were also increased.
Liver histidase activity was decreased about 75 % after nitromethane administration, and the rate of &lt;i&gt;in vivo &lt;/i&gt;CO&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt; production from histidine was also depressed.
No abnormal change in liver and kidney sizes was observed in these animals.
Rats fed the 5-percent histidine diet showed markedly higher plasma histidine concentrations (99 &lt;i&gt;µ&lt;/i&gt;mol/100 ml) than the nitromethane-treated rats.
The magnitude of increase in plasma histidine in the histidine-fed rats was considerably greater than that observed in humans with histidinemia.
Furthermore, the liver histidase activity was decreased only by about 20 %, and a significant increase in liver and kidney sizes was noted in the histidine-fed animals.
These findings indicate that histidinemia produced by nitromethane administration is a better model for studies of the genetic disorder than histidinemia induced by high levels of histidine in the diet.</jats:p>
Propagation of cortical spreading depression in malnourished rats: facilitatory effect of dietary protein deficiency. 1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1987;20(5):639-42.

Propagation of cortical spreading depression in malnourished rats: facilitatory 
effect of dietary protein deficiency.

Guedes RC(1)
 Andrade AF, Cabral-Filho JE.
Author information:
(1)Departamento de Nutrição, Universidade Federal de Pernambuco, Recife, Brasil.
Adult rats, submitted from gestation to the basic regional diet (BRD) of some 
human populations in the northeastern region of Brazil, presented higher 
velocities of propagation of cortical spreading depression (SD) than 
well-nourished animals.
This effect was also seen in rats receiving BRD during 
the gestation and suckling periods alone but not when this diet was administered 
only during adult life, suggesting that the alterations produced by BRD occur 
early in life.
The supplementation of BRD with lipids, vitamins and minerals 
(but not protein) did not prevent the appearance of this facilitatory effect in 
the gestation + suckling group, suggesting an important effect of protein 
deficiency in the BRD on cortical SD.
PMID: 3452458 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The neurochemical mechanisms of the inhibitory influences of stimulation of the central gray substance on the high-threshold reflex activity of the reticular formation]. 1. Neirofiziologiia. 1991;23(4):455-63.

[The neurochemical mechanisms of the inhibitory influences of stimulation of the 
central gray substance on the high-threshold reflex activity of the reticular 
formation].

[Article in Russian]

Karpukhina MV
 Gokin AP, Tikhomirov NE.
Influences of bulbar microinjections of some neuromodulator antagonists 
(methysergide, haloperidol, naloxone) on depression dynamics of 
spino-bulbo-spinal (SBS) reflex from the periaqueductal grey (PAG) stimulation 
were studied in chloralose anesthetized rats.
Microinjections were made into the 
reticular gigantocellular nucleus which is a main supraspinal centre of SBS 
reflexes.
It is found that methysergide administration (10(-5) mol/l) causes a 
considerable (two to four times as less) decrease of SBS-reflex depression 
evoked by PAG stimulation by a short high-frequency series of stimuli.
Long-lasting depression evoked usually by a long train of PAG stimuli is less 
reduced: from 6-10 to 2.5-4 min.
A considerable (2 to 5 times) shortening of 
this depression is revealed after naloxone injections (10(-5)-10(-4) mol/l).
The 
most expressed diminution of all types of inhibitions is shown to occur after 
haloperidol administration.
Data obtained evidence that all the studied 
neuromodulatory systems (5-HT, catecholamine and opioidergic ones) are involved 
to inhibitory action of PAG on high-threshold reflex activity of the reticular 
formation.
Some properties of neurochemical mechanisms of the studied PAG-evoked 
depression are discussed.
PMID: 1681433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Participation of GABA-ergic structures in producing the effects of haloperidol]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1980 Mar;89(3):313-5.

[Participation of GABA-ergic structures in producing the effects of 
haloperidol].

[Article in Russian]

Ostrovskaia RU
 Molodavkin GM.
A study was made of the effect of haloperidol on convulsions induced in mice by 
bicuculline and thiosemicarbazide and on the recovery cycles of the primary 
response in the rat sensorimotor cortex.
In doses of 0.3--0.5 mg/kg producing a 
tranquilizing effect, haloperidol exerts a protective action in convulsions 
induced by bicuculline blocking of the GABA receptors and enhances the 
depression of the testing response during recovery cycle of the rat sensorimotor 
cortex primary response.
It means that over this dosage range haloperidol 
potentiates GABA-induced effects.
An increase in the neuroleptic dose up to 1--2 
mg/kg entails disappearance of the efficacy shown by both the tests.
The 
authors' own and reported data suggest an important role played by the 
postsynaptic GABA-positive effect in realization of the tranquilizing action of 
haloperidol and other neurotropic agents.
PMID: 6248144 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of TRH and prolactin in the behavioral despair (swim) model of depression in rats 1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1990;15(5-6):349-56. doi: 
10.1016/0306-4530(90)90060-m.

Effects of TRH and prolactin in the behavioral despair (swim) model of 
depression in rats.

Drago F(1)
 Pulvirenti L, Spadaro F, Pennisi G.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, University of Catania Medical School, Italy.
The neuropeptides thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) and prolactin (PRL), which 
affect various behaviors in animals, showed "antidepressant" properties in an 
experimental model of depression.
Subcutaneous administration of TRH reduced the 
total immobility time of rats tested in the despair (constrained swim) test and 
potentiated the anti-immobility effect of intraperitoneally administered 
desimipramine (DMI).
This effect was not mimicked by the peripheral injection of 
TSH, T3 or T4.
Hyperprolactinemia induced by pituitary homografts under the 
kidney capsule and the intracerebroventricular injection of PRL also potentiated 
the DMI-induced reduction of total immobility time of rats in the despair test 
and exerted "antidepressant" effects in aged rats.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-4530(90)90060-m
PMID: 2129310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reduction of Experimental Myocardial Infarct Size by Corticosteroid Administration 1. J Clin Invest. 1973 Mar;52(3):599-607. doi: 10.1172/JCI107221.

Reduction of experimental myocardial infarct size by corticosteroid 
administration.

Libby P
 Maroko PR, Bloor CM, Sobel BE, Braunwald E.

The influence of the administration of pharmacologic doses of hydrocortisone on 
the extent and severity of acute myocardial ischemic injury and on subsequent 
necrosis after acute coronary occlusion was investigated in 28 dogs.
In order to 
study acute myocardial injury, repeated epicardial electrocardiograms were 
recorded from 10 to 15 sites on the anterior surface of the left ventricle.
Average ST segment elevation (ST) and the number of sites in which ST segment 
elevation exceeded 2 mV (NST), indices of the magnitude and extent of myocardial 
injury, respectively, were analyzed at 30 and 60 min after coronary occlusion.
In the control group ST and NST did not change significantly in this time 
interval while in the treated group, which received 50 mg/kg hydrocortisone just 
after the 30 min recording, ST fell from 3.5+/-0.8 to 1.1+/-0.4 mV (P<0.01) and 
NST was reduced from 6.7+/-1.1 to 1.4+/-0.8 (P<0.01).
In order to study the 
influence of hydrocortisone on necrosis, epicardial ST segment elevation 15 min 
after coronary occlusion was compared to myocardial creatine phosphokinase 
activity (CPK) and histologic appearance 24 h later in each site.
In a control 
group (14 dogs) a relationship was established between ST segment elevation at 
15 min (in millivolts) and CPK activity (in international units per milligram of 
protein) 24 h later: log CPK = -0.0611ST + 1.26 (N = 102 specimens, r = -0.79).
In the treated groups, hydrocortisone (50 mg/kg i.v.)
was given either at 30 min 
after occlusion (seven dogs) or at 6 h after occlusion (six dogs).
Both groups 
received supplementary doses of hydrocortisone (25 mg/kg) 12 h after occlusion.
The two treated groups exhibited less CPK depression than that expected from ST 
segment elevation at each site, with slopes of the regression lines which were 
significantly less steep: log CPK = -0.0288ST + 1.26 (N = 48, r = -0.71) and log 
CPK = -0.0321ST + 1.31 (N = 48, r = -0.76) in the (1/2) h and 6 h groups, 
respectively.
Histologically, sites with ST segment elevations of less than 2 mV 
at 15 min after occlusion exhibited normal appearance 24 h later.
Sites with ST 
segment elevations (> 2 mV) in the control group showed histologic changes 
compatible with early myocardial infarction in 96% of specimens, while this 
occurred only in 61% and 63% of specimens, respectively, in the treated groups, 
showing that over one third of the sites were protected from undergoing necrosis 
due to the intervening hydrocortisone treatment.
Thus pharmacological doses of 
hydrocortisone prevent myocardial cells from progressing to ischemic necrosis 
even when administration is initiated 6 h after coronary occlusion.
DOI: 10.1172/JCI107221
PMCID: PMC302298
PMID: 4685084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Autologous nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation in patients with severe anti-TNF refractory Crohn disease: long-term follow-up <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>We evaluated the safety and clinical outcome of autologous nonmyeloablative hematopoietic stem cell transplantation (HSCT) in patients with severe Crohn disease (CD) defined as a Crohn Disease Activity Index (CDAI) greater than 250
 and/or Crohn Severity Index greater than 16 despite anti–tumor necrosis factor therapy.
Stem cells were mobilized from the peripheral blood using cyclophosphamide (2.0 g/m2) and G-CSF (10 μg/kg/day), enriched ex vivo by CD34+ selection, and reinfused after immune suppressive conditioning with cyclophosphamide (200 mg/kg) and either equine antithymocyte globulin (ATG, 90 mg/kg) or rabbit ATG (6 mg/kg).
Eighteen of 24 patients are 5 or more years after transplantation.
All patients went into remission with a CDAI less than 150.
The percentage of clinical relapse-free survival defined as the percent free of restarting CD medical therapy after transplantation is 91% at 1 year, 63% at 2 years, 57% at 3 years, 39% at 4 years, and 19% at 5 years.
The percentage of patients in remission (CDAI &lt; 150), steroid-free, or medication-free at any posttransplantation evaluation interval more than 5 years after transplantation has remained at or greater than 70%, 80%, and 60%, respectively.
This trial was registered at www.clinicaltrials.gov as NCT0027853.</jats:p>
Potassium
 calcium, chloride and sodium changes in extracellular space during spreading depression in cerebellum [proceedings].
1.
Arzneimittelforschung.
1978;28(5):874-5.
Potassium, calcium, chloride and sodium changes in extracellular space during 
spreading depression in cerebellum [proceedings].
Nicholson C, Kraig RP, ten Bruggencate G, Stöckle H, Steinberg R.

PMID: 581976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Alkaline phosphatase in boar sperm function <jats:title>Summary</jats:title><jats:p>Alkaline phosphatase (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content>) catalyses the detachment of phosphate residues from different substrates. Its activity has been demonstrated in seminal plasma and spermatozoa from porcine and other mammalian species; anyway
 the role of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> in male reproduction has not been clarified yet and the aim of this study was to determine <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> function in boar sperm capacitation and in vitro fertilization (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IVF</jats:styled-content>).
<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> activity was assayed in seminal plasma and in uncapacitated and in vitro capacitated (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IVC</jats:styled-content>) spermatozoa; in addition, capacitation was studied in presence of different doses of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> (1.2 and 2.5 IU/mL).
The effect of different doses of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> (1.2 and 2.5 IU/mL) on several sperm parameters after <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IVC</jats:styled-content> (viability, acrosome integrity with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FITC</jats:styled-content>‐<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PSA</jats:styled-content>, capacitation status with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CTC</jats:styled-content> staining, tyrosine phosphorylation) and on fertilizing ability during <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IVF</jats:styled-content> were also evaluated.
High <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> activity was detected in seminal plasma, in particular in sperm‐rich fraction; a lower activity was detected in uncapacitated spermatozoa while a significant decrease was evidenced after <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IVC</jats:styled-content>.
Viability was not changed by <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> supplementation of the capacitating medium, whereas acrosome integrity and capacitation status were significantly affected by 1.2 and 2.5 doses, with a dose‐dependent decrease in acrosome‐reacted cells as well as in <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CTC</jats:styled-content> B pattern displaying cells.
As for sperm head protein phosphorylation, a decrease in relative fluorescence was detected in <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> 2.5 group, if compared with capacitated one.
After <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IVF</jats:styled-content>, a dose‐dependent decrease in penetrated oocytes was recorded, with an increase in monospermic zygote rate.
In conclusion, we demonstrated that <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> activity decreases under capacitating condition and that addition of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> to spermatozoa during capacitation results in a depression of the capacitating process and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">IVF</jats:styled-content>.
We can infer that <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AP</jats:styled-content> plays a role in keeping spermatozoa quiescent until they are ejaculated and in modulating the acquisition of the fertilizing ability.</jats:p>
Nitric oxide production and monoamine oxidase activity in cancer patients during interferon-α therapy 1. Amino Acids. 2009 Oct;37(4):703-8. doi: 10.1007/s00726-008-0191-x. Epub 2008
Oct  26.

Nitric oxide production and monoamine oxidase activity in cancer patients during 
interferon-alpha therapy.

Fekkes D(1)
 Van Gool AR, Bannink M, Sleijfer S, Kruit WH, van der Holt B, 
Eggermont AM, Hengeveld MW, Stoter G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Erasmus MC, Rotterdam, The Netherlands.
d.fekkes@erasmusmc.nl

Both increased and decreased nitric oxide (NO) synthesis have been reported in 
patients treated with interferon-alpha (IFN-alpha).
Animal studies showed that 
IFN-alpha administration results in increased levels of biogenic amines, 
subsequent activation of monoamine oxidases (MAOs), and finally in a change in 
NO production due to the H(2)O(2) generated by MAOs.
We examined the potential 
relationship between NO production in plasma and MAO-B activity in platelets of 
43 cancer patients during 8 weeks of treatment with IFN-alpha.
NO synthesis was 
quantitated by measuring both the ratio of citrulline and arginine 
(CIT/ARG-ratio) and total nitrite/nitrate (NOx) levels.
Compared to baseline, 
MAO activity and NOx increased, while the CIT/ARG-ratio decreased.
No 
associations were found between NOx, MAO and CIT/ARG-ratio.
Only few 
associations were observed between changes in the biochemical parameters and 
changes in psychopathology induced by IFN-alpha, of which the association 
between changes in CIT and lassitude was the most consistent.
The results 
suggest that peripheral NO production and MAO activity are unrelated to each 
other, and that peripheral changes in these biochemical parameters induced by 
IFN-alpha are unlikely to contribute to definite psychiatric disturbance.
DOI: 10.1007/s00726-008-0191-x
PMCID: PMC2753771
PMID: 18953681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Electrophysiological activity of raphe dorsalis serotoninergic neurones in a possible model of endogenous depression 1. Neuroreport. 1995 Mar 7;6(4):681-4. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199503000-00024.

Electrophysiological activity of raphe dorsalis serotoninergic neurones in a 
possible model of endogenous depression.

Maudhuit C(1)
 Hamon M, Adrien J.
Author information:
(1)INSERM U288, CHU Pitié-Salpêtrière, Paris, France.
It has been proposed that serotoninergic activity is impaired in endogenous 
depression.
We tested this hypothesis in an experimental model, where rats which 
have been treated with clomipramine during the first month of life exhibit at 
adult age behavioural and sleep alterations which resemble the human disorder.
Recording of serotoninergic neurones in the dorsal raphe nucleus revealed no 
modification of their spontaneous firing, but a reduced inhibitory response to 
the 5-HT re-uptake blocker citalopram in clomipramine-treated rats as compared 
to controls.
This suggests that neonatal clomipramine treatment results in a 
long lasting desensitization of somatodendritic 5-HT1A autoreceptors, leading 
possibly to a dysregulation of 5-HT neurone activity in this proposed model of 
depression.
DOI: 10.1097/00001756-199503000-00024
PMID: 7605927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sphingomyelinase depresses force and calcium sensitivity of the contractile apparatus in mouse diaphragm muscle fibers <jats:p>Diseases that result in muscle weakness
 e.g., heart failure, are characterized by elevated sphingomyelinase (SMase) activity.
In intact muscle, SMase increases oxidants that contribute to diminished muscle force.
However, the source of oxidants, specific processes of muscle contraction that are dysfunctional, and biochemical changes underlying the weakness elicited by SMase remain unknown.
We tested three hypotheses: 1) SMase-induced depression of muscle force is mediated by mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS), 2) SMase depresses force and calcium sensitivity of the contractile apparatus, and 3) SMase promotes oxidation and phosphorylation of myofibrillar proteins.
Our experiments included intact muscle bundles, permeabilized single fibers, and isolated myofibrillar proteins.
The mitochondrial-targeted antioxidant d-Arg-2′,6′-dimethyl-Tyr-Lys-Phe-NH<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>, decreased cytosolic oxidants and protected intact muscle bundles from weakness stimulated by SMase.
SMase depressed maximal calcium-activated force by 20% in permeabilized single fibers (in kN/m<jats:sup>2</jats:sup>: control 117 ± 6; SMase 93 ± 8; P &lt; 0.05).
Calcium sensitivity of permeabilized single fibers decreased from 5.98 ± 0.03 (control) to 5.91 ± 0.02 (SMase; P &lt; 0.05).
Myofibrillar protein nitrotyrosines, carbonyls, and phosphorylation were unaltered by SMase.
Our study shows that the fall in specific force of intact muscle elicited by SMase is mediated by mitochondrial ROS and can be attributed largely to dysfunction of the contractile apparatus.</jats:p>
1-Methyl-1-nitrosourea Depression of Brain Nicotinamide Adenine Dinucleotide in the Production of Neurologic Toxicity 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1969 Jun;131(2):517-20. doi:
10.3181/00379727-131-33914.

1-methyl-1-nitrosourea depression of brain nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide in 
the production of neurologic toxicity.

Schein PS.

DOI: 10.3181/00379727-131-33914
PMID: 4306807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Tumor cell killing by macrophages activated in vitro with lymphocyte mediators 1. Cell Immunol. 1978 Jul;38(2):264-75. doi: 10.1016/0008-8749(78)90057-6.

Tumor cell killing by macrophages activated in vitro with lymphocyte mediators. 
II. Inhibition by inhibitors of protein synthesis.

Sharma SD
 Piessens WF.
DOI: 10.1016/0008-8749(78)90057-6
PMID: 209901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fluoxetine protects hippocampal plasticity during conditioned fear stress and prevents fear learning potentiation 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2008 Mar;196(4):583-9. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-007-0993-7. Epub 2007 Nov 9.

Fluoxetine protects hippocampal plasticity during conditioned fear stress and 
prevents fear learning potentiation.

Spennato G(1)
 Zerbib C, Mondadori C, Garcia R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie et Psychopathologie, Université de Nice-Sophia 
Antipolis, JE2441 Nice, France.
RATIONALE: Contextual fear conditioning can produce both changes in hippocampal 
synaptic efficacy and potentiation of subsequent fear learning.
OBJECTIVES: In this study, we tested whether fluoxetine reverses these effects.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: In the first experiment, we examined alterations of 
baseline synaptic efficacy and induction of synaptic plasticity in the CA3 
region of the hippocampus during re-exposure of rats, treated with fluoxetine (7 
mg/kg) or vehicle, in a context where they previously received 15 eyelid shocks 
or no shock (controls).
In the second experiment, fear learning potentiation was 
examined in rats that were initially submitted to conditioning (15 eyelid 
shocks) and extinction training and then re-exposed to a less intense stressor 
(three eyelid shocks).
RESULTS: Conditioned fear stress decreased synaptic efficacy and blocked the 
induction of synaptic potentiation in the fimbria-CA3 pathway.
Conditioned rats 
treated with fluoxetine were protected against these electrophysiological 
changes and did not differ from controls (i.e., no depression and normal 
induction of potentiation of synaptic efficacy).
However, fluoxetine treatment 
did not suppress conditioned freezing.
After fear extinction, exposure of rats 
to a subconditioning stressor provoked conditioning (fear learning potentiation) 
in rats treated with vehicle but not in those treated with fluoxetine.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that fluoxetine treatment, which is 
ineffective on conditioned fear stress-induced freezing, may have beneficial 
effects on conditioned fear stress-induced disturbance of hippocampal 
plasticity.
These data also suggest that restoration of hippocampal functioning 
may contribute to protection against exaggerated reactions to mild stressors 
reported in patients with post-traumatic stress disorder.
DOI: 10.1007/s00213-007-0993-7
PMID: 17992518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selective suppression of cathepsin L results from elevations in lysosomal pH and is followed by proteolysis of tau protein 1. Neuroreport. 1998 Jun 22;9(9):2089-94. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199806220-00033.

Selective suppression of cathepsin L results from elevations in lysosomal pH and 
is followed by proteolysis of tau protein.

Bednarski E(1)
 Lynch G.

Author information:
(1)Center for the Neurobiology of Learning and Memory, University of California, 
Irvine 92697-3800, USA.
Incubation of cultured hippocampal slices with chloroquine, a compound that 
increases the pH of acidic subcellular organelles, for 10 h reduced the activity 
of cathepsin L by 83 +/- 0.87% (mean +/- s.e.m.)
while only marginally 
suppressing cathepsin B.
This effect was followed within 3 h by an increase in 
the concentration of mature, single-chain cathepsin D (up 61 +/- 28%).
Selective 
depression of cathepsin L with 
N-CBZ-L-phenylalanyl-L-phenylalanine-diazomethylketone also resulted in 
increases in enzymatically active cathepsin D and the delayed appearance of a 29 
kDa fragment of the tau protein.
These findings demonstrate that the pattern of 
cathepsin L, B, and D changes found in the aged brain can be reproduced by 
reducing the acidity of the lysosomal milieu.
They also indicate that such pH 
shifts initiate a sequence of linked disturbances (inactivation of cathepsin L > 
induction of cathepsin D > aberrant tau proteolysis) likely to play an important 
role in brain ageing.
DOI: 10.1097/00001756-199806220-00033
PMID: 9674599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Bioenergetic Recovery following Ischemia in Brain Slices Studied by <sup>31</sup>P-NMR Spectroscopy: Differential Age Effect of Depolarization Mediated by Endogenous Nitric Oxide <jats:p> Proximate neurotoxic mechanisms during postischemic recovery may be influenced by stage of development and complicating factors such as cortical spreading depression or secondary brain insult. Using <jats:sup>31</jats:sup>P nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy
 we have monitored pH and cellular energy metabolites phosphocreatine (PCr) and ATP in the ex vivo rat cerebral cortex before, during, and after substrate and oxygen deprivation, which represents “in vitro ischemia.” There were important developmental differences in resistance and response to an ischemic insult.
Twenty-one-day-old (P21) rat cortical slices had no detectable β-ATP or PCr at the end of a 20-min insult, while γ-day-old (P7) slices had 50 ± 13.7% (mean ± SD, n = 12) and 17 ± 14.8% relative to preischemia levels, respectively.
Postischemic depolarization resulted in age-dependent effects on PCr (p &lt; 0.05): In the older tissue, depolarization significantly worsened the recovery of PCr, whereas in young tissue it ameliorated recovery.
This amelioration could be prevented by inhibiting nitric oxide production with methylene blue (depolarization-methylene blue interaction, p &lt; 0.05) and enhanced by administration of the nitric oxide donor glyceryl trinitrate (GTN; p &lt; 0.01).
However, in P21 tissue, GTN further exacerbated injury (age-GTN interaction, p &lt; 0.01).
Therefore, in this vascular-independent preparation, a neuronal or glial nitric oxide-dependent mechanism appears to confer improved postischemic bioenergetic recovery in the developing brain compared with the mature brain.
</jats:p>
Effect of Oxygen Free Radicals on Cardiac Contractile Activity and Sarcolemmal Na(+)-Ca(2+) Exchange. 1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol Ther. 1996 Jul;1(3):211-218. doi: 
10.1177/107424849600100304.

Effect of Oxygen Free Radicals on Cardiac Contractile Activity and Sarcolemmal 
Na(+)-Ca(2+) Exchange.

Matsubara T(1)
 Dhalla NS.
Author information:
(1)Division of Cardiovascular Sciences, St. Boniface General Hospital Research 
Centre, Winnipeg, Manitoba, Canada

BACKGROUND: Although oxygen free radicals have been shown to induce myocardial 
cell damage and cardiac dysfunction, the exact mechanism by which these radicals 
affect the heart function is not clear.
Since the occurrence of intracellular 
Ca(2+) overload is critical in the genesis of cellular damage and cardiac 
dysfunction, and since the sarcolemmal Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchange is intimately 
involved in Ca(2+) movements in myocardium, this study was undertaken to examine 
the effects of oxygen free radicals on the relationship between changes in 
cardiac contractile force development and sarcolemmal Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchange 
activity.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Isolated rat hearts were perfused with a medium 
containing xanthine plus xanthine oxidase for different times, and changes in 
contractile force as well as sarcolemmal Na(+)-(2+) exchange activity were 
monitored.
Perfusion of the heart with xanthine plus xanthine oxidase resulted 
in a transient increase followed by a marked decrease in contractile activity; 
the resting tension was markedly increased.
The xanthine plus xanthine 
oxidase-induced depression in developed tension, rate of contraction, and rate 
of relaxation, except the transient increase in contractile activity, was 
prevented by the addition of catalase, but not by superoxide dismutase, in the 
perfusion medium.
A time-dependent depression in sarcolemmal Na(+)-Ca(2+) was 
also evident upon perfusing the heart with xanthine plus xanthine oxidase.
This 
depression in Na(+)-dependent Ca(2+) uptake was associated with a decrease in 
the maximal velocity of reaction without any changes in the affinity of 
Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchanger for Ca(2+).
The presence of catalase, unlike superoxide 
dismutase, prevented the decrease in sarcolemmal Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchange activity 
in hearts perfused with xanthine plus xanthine oxidase.
CONCLUSIONS: The results 
support the view that a depression in the sarcolemmal Na(+)-Ca(2+) exchange 
activity may contribute to the occurrence of intracellular Ca(2+) overload and 
subsequent decrease in contractile activity.
Furthermore, these actions of 
xanthine plus xanthine oxidase in the whole heart appear to be a consequence of 
H(2)O(2) production rather than the generation of superoxide radicals.
DOI: 10.1177/107424849600100304
PMID: 10684419
Effects of 60Co on electrical self-stimulation of the brain and blood pressure in monkeys. 1. Aerosp Med. 1974 Sep;45(9):1058-61.

Effects of 60Co on electrical self-stimulation of the brain and blood pressure 
in monkeys.

Bruner A.

PMID: 4413187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Emotional memory impairments in a genetic rat model of depression: involvement of 5-HT/MEK/Arc signaling in restoration 1. Mol Psychiatry. 2012 Feb;17(2):173-84. doi: 10.1038/mp.2010.131. Epub 2011 Jan
 18.

Emotional memory impairments in a genetic rat model of depression: involvement 
of 5-HT/MEK/Arc signaling in restoration.

Eriksson TM(1)
 Delagrange P, Spedding M, Popoli M, Mathé AA, Ögren SO, 
Svenningsson P.

Author information:
(1)Center of Molecular Medicine, Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, 
Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, Sweden.
Cognitive dysfunctions are common in major depressive disorder, but have been 
difficult to recapitulate in animal models.
This study shows that Flinders 
sensitive line (FSL) rats, a genetic rat model of depression, display a 
pronounced impairment of emotional memory function in the passive avoidance (PA) 
task, accompanied by reduced transcription of Arc in prefrontal cortex and 
hippocampus.
At the cellular level, FSL rats have selective reductions in levels 
of NMDA receptor subunits, serotonin 5-HT(1A) receptors and MEK activity.
Treatment with chronic escitalopram, but not with an antidepressant regimen of 
nortriptyline, restored memory performance and increased Arc transcription in 
FSL rats.
Multiple pharmacological manipulations demonstrated that procognitive 
effects could also be achieved by either disinhibition of 5-HT(1A)R/MEK/Arc or 
stimulation of 5-HT₄R/MEK/Arc signaling cascades.
Taken together, studies of FSL 
rats in the PA task revealed reversible deficits in emotional memory processing, 
providing a potential model with predictive and construct validity for 
assessments of procognitive actions of antidepressant drug therapies.
DOI: 10.1038/mp.2010.131
PMCID: PMC3265836
PMID: 21242991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
REPRODUCTIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL TOXICITY STUDIES OF FUT-187 (I) : Fertility Study in Rats with Oral Administration of FUT-187 1. J Toxicol Sci. 1992 Dec;17 Suppl 4:201-19. doi:
10.2131/jts.17.supplementiv_201.

[Reproductive and developmental toxicity studies of FUT-187. (I)--Fertility 
study in rats with oral administration of FUT-187].

[Article in Japanese]

Furuhashi T(1)
 Uehara M, Kodama R, Yoshida R, Maruden A, Shimamura K.

Author information:
(1)NRI Life Science, Kanagawa, Japan.
FUT-187 was given orally at 20, 120 and 720 mg/kg during the pre-pairing period 
(63 days prior to pairing in males and 14 days prior to pairing in females) and 
the pairing period to male and female rats and in the early stage of pregnancy 
(days 0 through 7 of gestation) to female rats, and the effects of the test 
compound on male and female reproductive performance and fetal development were 
evaluated.
One male of the 720 mg/kg group died due to treatment.
Temporary 
salivation was observed in males and females in the 20 mg/kg or more groups.
In 
males, increases in the weight of the pancreas in the 120 mg/kg or more groups 
and the adrenals in the 720 mg/kg group, a depression of body weight gain and 
decreases in food intake and weight of the carcass in the 720 mg/kg group were 
statistically significant in comparison with controls.
In females, an increase 
in the weight of the pancreas in the 120 mg/kg or more groups, a slight 
depression of body weight gain during the early stage of pregnancy and a 
decrease in the food intake, and a decrease in the weight of the carcass in the 
720 mg/kg group were statistically significant in comparison with controls.
No 
dose-related changes were found in the estrus, copulation, insemination and 
fertility indices.
In fetuses, decreased numbers of corpora lutea, implantation 
and live fetuses were observed in the 720 mg/kg group.
There were no 
treatment-related abnormalities in fetal mortality, sex ratio, weights of 
fetuses and placenta, and external and visceral examinations.
Based on these 
results, it is concluded that the no-effect-dose levels of FUT-187 are less than 
20 mg/kg for the parents, 720 mg/kg for reproductive performance and 120 mg/kg 
for fetal development.
DOI: 10.2131/jts.17.supplementiv_201
PMID: 1296024 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Bioactive Polyphenols from the Methanol Extract of<i>Cnicus arvensis</i>(L.) Roth Demonstrated Antinociceptive and Central Nervous System Depressant Activities in Mice <jats:p><jats:italic>Cnicus arvensis</jats:italic>is used by many ethnic groups for inflammation
 pain, and other ailments.
In this study, reducing sugar, carbohydrate, alkaloid, steroid, tannin, flavonoid, and saponin groups were identified using standard chromogenic method.
In high-performance liquid chromatography, vanillic acid and epicatechin were identified in the extract.
Antinociceptive test by acetic acid induced writhing inhibition resulted 43.17 and 95.08% inhibition for 100 and 200 mg/kg body weight, comparing with standard diclofenac Na with 74.86% inhibition for 25 mg/kg body weight.
In formalin induced paw licking test for antinociceptive activity, the extract inhibited 69.87 and 75.55% licking for 150 and 300 mg/kg body weight comparing with the inhibition (68.56%) of diclofenac Na for 10 mg/kg body weight at first phase.
At late phase, the extract showed 73.12 and 87.46% licking comparing with licking inhibition (71.69%) by diclofenac Na at the same dose.
In open field test for CNS depressant activity, the extract showed depression of locomotor activity for 150 and 300 mg/kg body weight comparing with diazepam for 10 mg/kg body weight.
All results were statistically significant<mml:math xmlns:mml="http://www.w3.org/1998/Math/MathML" id="M1"><mml:mo stretchy="false">(</mml:mo><mml:mi>P</mml:mi><mml:mo>&lt;</mml:mo><mml:mn>0.01</mml:mn><mml:mo stretchy="false">)</mml:mo></mml:math>.
The identified polyphenols are reputed for antinociceptive and CNS depressant activity.
The present findings support the use of this plant in pain.</jats:p>
The Effect of Mitomycin C on Antigenic and Mitogenic Stimulation of Mouse Lymphocytes In Vitro <jats:p>The effect of mitomycin C on DNA synthesis and plaque formation in mouse spleen cells was studied in vitro
 with special reference to the synergistic effect observed between some antigens and mitogens on lymphocyte stimulation.
Mitomycin C inhibited DNA synthesis in doses that did not cause an extensive cell death It blocked almost completely a primary plaque‐forming cell response to sheep erythrocytes (SRC) and, to a great extent, PPD‐induced antibody synthesis detected against SRC.
The synergistic effect earlier observed in vitro between SRC and PPD was not abolished in cultures where replication of DNA was depressed.
Simultaneous stimulation with SRC and PPD in cultures treated with mitomycin C allows an estimation of the number of antigen‐sensitive cells to SRC that are stimulated to antibody synthesis without prior cell division.</jats:p>
Increased susceptibility to cortical spreading depression in an animal model of medication-overuse headache <jats:sec><jats:title>Objective</jats:title><jats:p> The objective of this article is to evaluate electrically evoked thresholds for cortical spreading depression (CSD) and stress-induced activation of trigeminal afferents in a rat model of medication-overuse headache (MOH). </jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Methods</jats:title><jats:p> Sumatriptan or saline was delivered subcutaneously by osmotic minipump for six days to Sprague-Dawley rats. Two weeks after pump removal
 animals were anesthetized and recording/stimulating electrodes implanted.
The animals were pretreated with vehicle or topiramate followed by graded electrical stimulation within the visual cortex.
CSD events were identified by decreased EEG amplitude and DC potential shift.
Additional unanesthetized sumatriptan or saline-pretreated rats were exposed to bright light environmental stress and periorbital and hindpaw withdrawal thresholds were measured.
Following CSD stimulation or environmental stress, immunohistochemical staining for Fos in the trigeminal nucleus caudalis (TNC) was performed.
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p> Sumatriptan pre-exposure significantly decreased electrical stimulation threshold to generate a CSD event.
Topiramate normalized the decreased CSD threshold as well as stress-induced behavioral withdrawal thresholds in sumatriptan-treated rats compared to saline-treated animals.
Moreover, CSD and environmental stress increased Fos expression in the TNC of sumatriptan-treated rats, and these effects were blocked by topiramate.
Environmental stress did not elicit cutaneous allodynia or elevate TNC Fos expression in saline-treated rats.
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title><jats:p> A previous period of sumatriptan exposure produced long-lasting increased susceptibility to evoked CSD and environmental stress-induced activation of the TNC that was prevented by topiramate.
Lowered CSD threshold, and enhanced consequences of CSD events (increased activation of TNC), may represent an underlying biological mechanism of MOH related to triptans.
</jats:p></jats:sec>
Strategies for the study of tumor invasion using an assay in vitro. 1. Pathol Biol (Paris). 1989 Nov;37(9):1022-3.

Strategies for the study of tumor invasion using an assay in vitro.

Bracke M(1)
 Vyncke B, Coopman P, Mareel M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiotherapy and Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital, Gent, 
Belgium.
PMID: 2608326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A novel compound N1
N5-(Z)-N10-(E)-tri-p-coumaroylspermidine isolated from Carthamus tinctorius L. and acting by serotonin transporter inhibition 1.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol.
2009 Oct;19(10):749-58. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2009.06.009.
Epub 2009 Jul 3.
A novel compound N(1),N(5)-(Z)-N(10)-(E)-tri-p-coumaroylspermidine isolated from 
Carthamus tinctorius L. and acting by serotonin transporter inhibition.
Zhao G(1), Gai Y, Chu WJ, Qin GW, Guo LH.
Author information:
(1)Cell Star Bio-Technologies Co., Limited, 898 Halei Road, Shanghai 201203, 
People's Republic of China.
Safflower, the dry flower of Carthamus tinctorius L., has long been applied for 
empirically treating cerebral ischemia and depression in traditional Chinese 
medicine.
Pathogenesis of major depression involves monoaminergic transmission.
The present study assessed whether safflower or its isolate would be effective 
in functionally regulating monoamine transporter using in vitro screening cell 
lines.
We discovered that safflower insoluble fraction significantly inhibited 
serotonin uptake in Chinese hamster ovary cells stably expressing serotonin 
transporter (i.e.
S6 cells).
This fraction went through an activity-guided 
isolation and an active ingredient was obtained, which was subsequently 
elucidated as a novel coumaroylspermidine analog 
N(1),N(5)-(Z)-N(10)-(E)-tri-p-coumaroylspermidine using NMR techniques.
Pharmacologically, this compound potently and selectively inhibited serotonin 
uptake in S6 cells or in synaptosomes, with IC(50) of 0.74+/-0.15 microM for S6 
cells or 1.07+/-0.23 microM for synaptosomes and with a reversible competitive 
property for the 5HT-uptake inhibition.
The potency of it for 5HT uptake was 
weaker than that of fluoxetine whereas efficacy generally similar for both.
Animals treated with this testing compound showed a significant decrease in 
synaptosomal 5HT uptake capacity.
Thus, 
N(1),N(5)-(Z)-N(10)-(E)-tri-p-coumaroylspermidine is a novel serotonin 
transporter inhibitor, which could improve neuropsychological disorders through 
regulating serotoninergic transmission.
DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2009.06.009
PMID: 19577438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Mechanisms of Inhibition of Frog Endplate Currents With Homologous Derivatives of the 1
1-dimethyl-3-oxybutyl Phosphonic Acid <jats:p>The mode of inhibition of endplate currents by four esters of 1,1-dimethyl-3-oxybutyl phosphonic acid with different lipophilicities and molecule lengths were estimated by mathematical modeling based on previous electrophysiological data supplemented by several experiments with rhythmic stimulation.
The aim was to discriminate between their receptor and non-receptor effects.
It was shown that all esters have a two-component mechanism of depression: inhibition of the receptor open channel and allosteric modulation of the receptor-channel complex.
The ratio of both functional components depends on the length and lipophilicity of the esters.
Short and less lipophilic esters mostly act as open channel inhibitors and the rate of inhibition substantially depends on the rate of stimulation, i. e. probability of the receptor-channel opening.
As the length of the ester radicals and their lipophilicity increased, these compounds were more active as allosteric receptor inhibitors, probably hindering the function of nAChRs from the lipid annulus.</jats:p>
Differential Suppression of Follicle-Stimulating Hormone and Luteinizing Hormone Secretion in vivo by a Gonadotropin-Releasing Hormone Antagonist 1. Neuroendocrinology. 1985 Mar;40(3):246-52. doi: 10.1159/000124081.

Differential suppression of follicle-stimulating hormone and luteinizing hormone 
secretion in vivo by a gonadotropin-releasing hormone antagonist.

Grady RR
 Shin L, Charlesworth MC, Cohen-Becker IR, Smith M, Rivier C, Rivier J, 
Vale W, Schwartz NB.
Because of some indication that FSH secretion is less dependent than LH 
secretion on GnRH in vivo, we performed experiments to examine the effects of a 
GnRH antagonist (antag) on LH and FSH secretion.
We first showed that pituitary 
cells superfused with GnRH showed a similar pattern of suppressed secretion of 
both LH and FSH in response to addition of antag.
In contrast, antag 
administration to ovariectomized rats had differing effects on LH and FSH 
secretion.
Serum LH was suppressed in a dose-dependent fashion by 2 h (20-50% of 
control values).
Recovery from the lower doses of antag was seen by 12 h, but 
the two highest doses maintained serum LH levels at 10% of control values for 72 
h. In contrast, the effect on serum FSH was not manifested until 12 h. FSH was 
maximally decreased only to 40-60% of control values.
The two highest doses 
maintained this effect for 72 h. These results reinforce previous suggestions 
that FSH secretion in vivo may occur independently of acute changes in GnRH 
secretion, and may have an GnRH-independent component.
DOI: 10.1159/000124081
PMID: 3921860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Paradoxical decrease in norepinephrine content of adult mouse spleen and heart after neonatal nerve growth factor treatment 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1975 Dec 1;24(23):2213-6. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(75)90054-4.

Paradoxical decrease in norepinephrine content of adult mouse spleen and heart 
after neonatal nerve growth factor treatment.

Campbell RJ
 Wilson LG, Herschman HR, DiCara LV, Stone EA.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(75)90054-4
PMID: 1212268 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Possible role of oxygen-derived
 free radicals in cardiocirculatory shock.
1.
Surg Gynecol Obstet.
1987 Oct;165(4):293-300.
Possible role of oxygen-derived, free radicals in cardiocirculatory shock.
Horton JW(1), Borman KR.
Author information:
(1)University of Texas Health Science Center, Department of Surgery, Dallas 
75235-9031.
The release of oxygen free radicals from ischemic myocardial tissue has been 
implicated as a causative factor of cell membrane damage and cardiac dysfunction 
in hemorrhagic shock.
This study was done to determine whether or not hydrogen 
peroxide (H2O2) and superoxide ion (O2) are responsible for cardiac injury from 
hemorrhagic shock as indicated by reduced coronary perfusion and impaired 
contractile function.
This hypothesis was tested by infusing selective O2 and 
H2O2 scavengers into anesthetized dogs in a state of shock, either during shock 
(group 3) or with fluid resuscitation (group 2) and comparing the cardiovascular 
response to that seen with shock and fluid resuscitation alone (group 1).
We 
found no significant difference in shock induced derangements in myocardial 
oxygen metabolism or the degree of myocardial depression and regional ischemia 
in dogs in a state of shock given superoxide dismutase plus catalase, compared 
with shock alone.
The results of our data suggested that, if O2 and H2O2 play a 
causative role in shock induced cardiac dysfunction or during reperfusion after 
shock, free radical scavengers must be administered early in the ischemic 
period.
Furthermore, free radical scavengers administered with reperfusion do 
not enchance cardiac function nor myocardial perfusion.
PMID: 2821638 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Regulation of pre-transfer RNA synthesis during transition from resting to growing state 1. Cell. 1974 Oct;3(2):171-7. doi: 10.1016/0092-8674(74)90122-6.

Regulation of pre-transfer RNA synthesis during transition from resting to 
growing state.

Mauck JC
 Green H.

DOI: 10.1016/0092-8674(74)90122-6
PMID: 4473272 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Anxious and Hyperactive Phenotype Following Brief Ischemic Episodes in Mice 1. Biol Psychiatry. 2005 May 15;57(10):1166-75. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.02.010.

Anxious and hyperactive phenotype following brief ischemic episodes in mice.

Winter B(1)
 Juckel G, Viktorov I, Katchanov J, Gietz A, Sohr R, Balkaya M, 
Hörtnagl H, Endres M.

Author information:
(1)Klinik und Poliklinik für Neurologie der Charité, Charité-Universitätsmedizin 
Berlin, Berlin, Germany.
BACKGROUND: Poststroke emotional and behavioral abnormalities have an impact on 
outcome but have scarcely been characterized in animal models.
We tested whether 
brief ischemic episodes induce behavioral changes in mice.
METHODS: 129/Sv mice were subjected to 30-min occlusion of left or right middle 
cerebral artery (MCAo) followed by reperfusion or sham operation (n = 9 or 10 
per group).
Eight to ten weeks later, mice were tested for spontaneous locomotor 
activity, anxiety in the elevated plus maze, and depressive behavior in the 
modified Porsolt forced swim test.
Outcome was correlated to monoamine and amino 
acid levels and compared with histologic damage at 10 weeks.
RESULTS: Ischemia was associated with increased activity (right MCAo) and 
anxiety (left MCAo), but not poststroke depression.
Noradrenaline increased by 
30%-45% in the ischemic striatum and correlated with locomotor activity (r = 
.48); dopamine and homovanillinic acid were decreased compared with sham.
The 
lesion was confined to the striatum, and scattered neuronal death was observed 
in a number of remote brain regions.
CONCLUSION: Brief ischemic episodes in the mouse induce an anxious, hyperactive 
but not depressive phenotype that may relate to left versus right hemispheric 
lesion location, alterations in brain monoamine levels, and selective 
neurodegeneration.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2005.02.010
PMID: 15866557 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inbreeding depression and male-mating behavior inDrosophila melanogaster 1. Genetica. 1993;88(1):29-36. doi: 10.1007/BF02424449.

Inbreeding depression and male-mating behavior in Drosophila melanogaster.

Miller PS(1)
 Glasner J, Hedrick PW.
Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, Arizona State University, Tempe 85287-1501.
There have been relatively few studies designed to investigate the effects of 
inbreeding on behavioral traits.
To study this phenomenon, five experimental 
lines of Drosophila melanogaster made isogenic for chromosome 2 were evaluated 
for their male-mating ability and, subsequently, male courtship behavior.
All 
lines showed significant reductions in overall mating ability, and males from 
all of these lines displayed impaired mating behavior, with two lines displaying 
particularly aberrant courtship patterns.
Line 16 displayed an inability to 
successfully initiate copulation following successful courtship, while line 17 
displayed significant reduction in locomotor activity, resulting in virtually no 
successful courtship or copulatory activity.
The implications of these findings 
for competitive mating ability in wild Drosophila populations are presented.
Further, the importance of mating success as a fitness component in the 
management of potentially highly inbred populations of endangered species is 
discussed.
DOI: 10.1007/BF02424449
PMID: 8375666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Non-competitive inhibition of clomipramineN-demethylation by fluvoxamine 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1995 Jan;117(2):149-53. doi: 10.1007/BF02245180.

Non-competitive inhibition of clomipramine N-demethylation by fluvoxamine.

Härtter S(1)
 Arand M, Oesch F, Hiemke C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Mainz, Germany.
The selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor fluvoxamine interferes with the 
metabolism of tricyclic antidepressants.
The present investigation was set out 
to characterize these interactions in vitro using rat liver microsomes and in 
vivo by analysing levels of clomipramine and metabolites in sera of depressed 
patients treated concomitantly with fluvoxamine and clomipramine.
Clomipramine 
was N-demethylated and hydroxylated in vitro by microsomes to 
N-desmethyl-clomipramine, 8-hydroxyclomipramine, and 10-hydroxyclomipramine.
Kinetic analyses revealed Km values of 6.2 microM for N-demethylation and 1.2 
microM for 8-hydroxylation.
Fluvoxamine was a non-competitive inhibitor for 
N-demethylation with mean Ki value of 6 microM.
In the sera of patients treated 
with daily doses of 150 mg clomipramine and varying doses of fluvoxamine, 
decrease in the formation of N-desmethylclomipramine and 8-hydroxyclomipramine 
were found in comparison to those in sera of patients receiving clomipramine as 
monotherapy.
Taken together, the data give evidence that fluvoxamine is a potent 
non-competitive inhibitor of N-demethylation and to a minor extent of 
8-hydroxylation of clomipramine.
Because of the species differences in the 
metabolism of xenobiotics between rodents and humans, conclusions from animal 
studies on the clinical situation must be drawn cautiously.
Nevertheless, the in 
vitro approach was helpful to understand drug interactions between clomipramine 
and fluvoxamine in psychiatric patients.
DOI: 10.1007/BF02245180
PMID: 7753960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Biphasic Response of the Rat Lateral Prostate to Increasing Levels of Serum Prolactin
1 1. Biol Reprod. 1983 Nov;29(4):938-45. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod29.4.938.

Biphasic response of the rat lateral prostate to increasing levels of serum 
prolactin.

Prins GS
 Lee C.

Our previous work has shown that an increase in serum prolactin (Prl) levels 
produced by two pituitary grafts specifically enhances testosterone-stimulated 
growth of the rat lateral prostate.
Since Prl has been shown in several 
mammalian systems to have biphasic effects, i.e., stimulatory at low doses and 
inhibitory or without effect at high levels, the present study was undertaken to 
determine whether the prostate gland would respond differentially to increasing 
Prl levels.
Adult male rats were castrated, given s.c. testosterone implants and 
grafted with 0, 1, 2, 4 or 6 pituitaries under the renal capsule.
Three weeks 
later all animals were sacrificed.
The three prostate lobes were removed for 
analysis and blood was collected for Prl and testosterone radioimmunoassay.
There were no significant differences in ventral and dorsal lobe parameters 
among the 5 groups whereas the lateral lobe showed a marked tropic response.
As 
serum Prl levels increased, the weight of the lateral prostate first increased 
and then diminished.
Mean weights (mg +/- SEM) were: 40 +/- 3, 65 +/- 3, 76 +/- 
6, 70 +/- 4 and 59 +/- 3 for animals with 0, 1, 2, 4 and 6 grafts, respectively.
Protein and DNA levels showed the same response pattern.
To ensure that this 
response was a result of elevated Prl, the study was repeated with daily 
injections of bromoergocriptine (CB-154).
The mean weights after 3 weeks in the 
control and CB-154-treated animals, respectively were: 0 graft, 44 +/- 3 and 43 
+/- 2; 2 grafts, 81 +/- 4 and 41 +/- 3; 6 grafts, 56 +/- 3 and 44 +/- 3.
Again, 
a biphasic response occurred in control animals.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod29.4.938
PMID: 6640042 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cysteine sulfinic acid can enhance the central depressant effect of ethanol in mice 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1991 Jul;39(3):653-7. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(91)90142-o.

Cysteine sulfinic acid can enhance the central depressant effect of ethanol in 
mice.

Ferko AP(1).

Author information:
(1)Hahnemann University
 School of Medicine, Department of Pharmacology, 
Philadelphia, PA 19102.
The interaction between ethanol and cysteine sulfinic acid was examined in male 
Swiss-Webster mice.
The loss of the righting reflex (LORR) was used as a 
measurement of central nervous system depression.
In addition, the interaction 
between ethanol and cysteic acid, a metabolite of cysteine sulfinic acid, was 
studied.
Immediately after the animals regained the righting reflex following 
ethanol injection (IP), mice were given an ICV injection of saline, cysteine 
sulfinic acid (1, 15 or 25 mumol/kg) or cysteic acid (1, 15, or 25 mumol/kg).
There occurred a return to the LORR within 30 s after the ICV injection of 
drugs.
The return to the LORR by the administration of the amino acids in the 
presence of ethanol occurred in a dose-dependent fashion.
When cysteine sulfinic 
acid or cysteic acid (25 mumol/kg, ICV) was injected in the absence of ethanol, 
no loss of the righting reflex occurred.
In other experiments, bicuculline 
methiodide was given ICV with cysteine sulfinic acid (25 mumol/kg), cysteic acid 
(25 mumol/kg), or GABA (25 mumol/kg) in the presence of ethanol.
Bicuculline 
methiodide, a GABA antagonist, reduced the effects of the three amino acids to 
produce a return to the LORR in the presence of ethanol.
These results indicate 
that cysteine sulfinic acid, an excitatory amino acid, and cysteic acid can 
enhance the central depressant properties of ethanol.
Since bicuculline 
antagonized the effects of these two amino acids, a GABAergic mechanism may be 
involved in the interaction between ethanol and cysteine sulfinic acid or 
cysteic acid.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(91)90142-o
PMID: 1686102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
NT-3 Increases Amplitude of EPSPs Produced by Axotomized Group Ia Afferents <jats:p> We thank K. Foli for technical support and Regeneron Pharmaceuticals for providing NT-3. </jats:p><jats:p> This research was supported by National Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke Grants NS-15913 (Javits Neuroscience Award) to J. B. Munson and NS-16996 (Javits Neuroscience Award) to L. M. Mendell. Additional support was furnished by NS-14899 and NS-32264 to L. M. Mendall. </jats:p><jats:p> Present addresses: R. D. Johnson
 Dept.
of Physiological Sciences, University of Florida College of Veterinary Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610; L. M. Mendell, Dept.
of Neurobiology and Behaviour, SUNY at Stony Brook, Stony Brook, NY 11794.
</jats:p>
Cholesterol and CSF 5-HIAA in attempted suicide 1. J Affect Disord. 2010 Sep;125(1-3):388-92. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2010.02.111.
Epub  2010 Mar 17.

Cholesterol and CSF 5-HIAA in attempted suicide.

Asellus P(1)
 Nordström P, Jokinen J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Neuroscience/Psychiatry, Karolinska Institutet, 
Karolinska University Hospital, Solna, SE-171 76 Stockholm, Sweden.
BACKGROUND: Low serum cholesterol has been linked to suicide and violent 
behaviour.
The same kind of associations has been reported regarding low levels 
of 5-hydroxyindolacetic acid (5-HIAA) in the cerebrospinal fluid (CSF) and 
suicidal behaviour.
The hypothesis of the link between serum cholesterol and 
suicide incorporate serotonin.
It proposes that low cholesterol is related to 
altered serotonergic neurotransmission.
A correlation between CSF 5-HIAA and 
serum cholesterol has been shown in animal studies, but has not been found in 
humans.
AIM: To study the interrelationship between serum cholesterol and CSF 5-HIAA in 
suicide attempters.
Since both cholesterol and CSF 5-HIAA are associated with 
suicide and violent suicide attempts, we also investigated the correlation with 
suicide, violent suicide attempt method, suicide intent, hopelessness and 
depression severity.
METHODS: Serum total cholesterol and CSF 5-HIAA were measured in 42 medication 
free suicide attempters.
Patients were assessed with Becks's Hopelessness scale 
(BHS), Suicide Intent Scale (SIS) and Montgomery-Asberg depression rating scale 
(MADRS) and followed-up for causes of death.
RESULTS: Serum total cholesterol and CSF 5-HIAA showed a significant positive 
correlation adjusted for age, body mass index and substance abuse diagnosis.
Cholesterol and CSF 5-HIAA levels did not differ between violent and non-violent 
suicide attempters or between suicide completers and survivors.
CONCLUSIONS: These findings indicate that the serotonergic system may be 
connected to serum cholesterol in patients with a recent suicide attempt.
2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2010.02.111
PMID: 20299106 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Heterogeneity of Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors in the Striatum: Electrophysiological Evidence <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>In order to investigate the functional role of metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) in the striatum we performed extracellular and intracellular recordings from a corticostriatal brain slice preparation. The effects of <jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐2‐amino‐3‐phosphopropionic acid (<jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐AP3)
 an antagonist of mGluRs, were studied both on long‐term synaptic depression (LTD) and on presynaptic inhibition of excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) induced by different agonists of mGluRs.
<jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐AP3 produced a dose‐dependent (3 – 30 μM) reduction of the LTD evoked in the striatum by the tetanic stimulation of the corticostriatal pathway.
In contrast to this action, <jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐AP3 (10 – 100 μM) did not significantly affect the presynaptic inhibitory effect of 1‐amino‐cyclopentyl‐<jats:italic>trans</jats:italic>‐dicarboxylic acid (<jats:italic>t</jats:italic>‐ACPD), an agonist of mGluRs, on corticostriatal transmission.
Higher concentrations of <jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐AP3 (0.3 – 1 mM) reduced by themselves the EPSP amplitude.
The inhibitory effect of <jats:italic>t</jats:italic>‐ACPD on the cortically evoked EPSPs was mimicked either by the active stereoisomer 1S,3R‐ACPD or by amino‐4‐phosphonobutyric acid (<jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐AP4), a glutamate autoreceptor agonist.
In some neurons, these inhibitory actions were coupled with membrane depolarizations.
The depression of synaptic transmission caused by <jats:italic>t</jats:italic>‐ACPD, 1S,3R‐ACPD and <jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐AP4 was not altered following the induction of LTD.
Chronic lithium treatment of the animals (60–120 mg/kg i.p.
for 10 days) blocked striatal LTD but not presynaptic inhibition mediated by mGluR agonists.
The present findings show that the mechanisms underlying LTD and the presynaptic inhibition induced by different agonists of mGluRs exhibit functional and pharmacological differences.
These data suggest heterogeneity of mGluRs in the striatum.</jats:p>
Deuterium content of water increases depression susceptibility: The potential role of a serotonin-related mechanism 1. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Jan 15;277:237-44. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.039. Epub 
2014 Aug 1.

Deuterium content of water increases depression susceptibility: the potential 
role of a serotonin-related mechanism.

Strekalova T(1)
 Evans M(2), Chernopiatko A(3), Couch Y(2), Costa-Nunes J(4), 
Cespuglio R(5), Chesson L(6), Vignisse J(7), Steinbusch HW(8), Anthony DC(2), 
Pomytkin I(3), Lesch KP(9).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Oxford University, Oxford, UK; Institute for 
Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, New University of Lisbon, Portugal; School for 
Mental Health and Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, Maastricht 
University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
Electronic address: 
bioc0541@pharm.ox.ac.uk.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Oxford University, Oxford, UK.
(3)Laboratory of Cognitive Dysfunctions, Institute of General Pathology and 
Pathophysiology, Moscow, Russia; Timantti AB, Stockholm, Sweden.
(4)Institute for Hygiene and Tropical Medicine, New University of Lisbon, 
Portugal.
(5)Claude Bernard University, Faculty of Medicine, EA 4170 Lyon, France.
(6)IsoForensics Inc., Salt Lake City, UT, USA.
(7)GIGA Neuroscience, University of Liege, Liege, Belgium.
(8)School for Mental Health and Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands.
(9)School for Mental Health and Neuroscience, Department of Neuroscience, 
Maastricht University, Maastricht, Netherlands; Division of Molecular 
Psychiatry, Laboratory of Translational Neuroscience, Department of Psychiatry, 
Psychosomatics and Psychotherapy, University of Wuerzburg, Wuerzburg, Germany.
Electronic address: kplesch@mail.uni-wuerzburg.de.
Environmental factors can significantly affect disease prevalence, including 
neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression.
The ratio of deuterium to protium 
in water shows substantial geographical variation, which could affect disease 
susceptibility.
Thus the link between deuterium content of water and depression 
was investigated, both epidemiologically, and in a mouse model of chronic mild 
stress.
We performed a correlation analysis between deuterium content of tap 
water and rates of depression in regions of the USA.
Next, we used a 10-day 
chronic stress paradigm to test whether 2-week deuterium-depleted water 
treatment (91 ppm) affects depressive-like behavior and hippocampal SERT.
The 
effect of deuterium-depletion on sleep electrophysiology was also evaluated in 
naïve mice.
There was a geographic correlation between a content of deuterium 
and the prevalence of depression across the USA.
In the chronic stress model, 
depressive-like features were reduced in mice fed with deuterium-depleted water, 
and SERT expression was decreased in mice treated with deuterium-treated water 
compared with regular water.
Five days of predator stress also suppressed 
proliferation in the dentate gyrus; this effect was attenuated in mice fed with 
deuterium-depleted water.
Finally, in naïve mice, deuterium-depleted water 
treatment increased EEG indices of wakefulness, and decreased duration of REM 
sleep, phenomena that have been shown to result from the administration of 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI).
Our data suggest that the 
deuterium content of water may influence the incidence of affective 
disorder-related pathophysiology and major depression, which might be mediated 
by the serotoninergic mechanisms.
Copyright © 2014 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2014.07.039
PMID: 25092571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selective resistance to togaviral superinfection in mice with tolerant lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection. 1. Acta Virol. 1979 Sep;23(5):385-92.

Selective resistance to togaviral superinfection in mice with tolerant 
lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus infection.

Nguyen Hong Diet
 Libíková H.

Mice infected neonatally with lymphocytic choriomeningitis virus (LCMV) 
developed partial and complete resitance to cerebral superinfection with 
tick-borne encephalitis virus (TEV) in 10 and 20 days after birth, respectively.
This resistance lasted at least till the age of 40 days.
LCMV tolerant mice 
neither succumbed to TEV infection, nor circulated TEV in their blood.
Moderate, 
gradually decreasing TEV titres were detected in the brains and TEV-induced 
brain interferon was lower than in control mice of the same age.
TEV 
superinfection caused a significant depression of the blood titre of tolerated 
LCMV while the titres in the brains remained equal to those in tolerant but not 
superinfected mice.
LCMV tolerant mice showed a similar resistance to another 
togavirus (chikungunya) but not to encephalitogenic picorna-, herpes- and 
rhabdoviruses.
PMID: 42297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ethanol-induced depressions in cerebellar and hippocampal neurons of mice selectively bred for differences in ethanol sensitivity: An electrophysiological study 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1981 Feb;14(2):227-34. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(81)90248-3.

Ethanol-induced depressions in cerebellar and hippocampal neurons of mice 
selectively bred for differences in ethanol sensitivity: an electrophysiological 
study.

Sorensen S
 Dunwiddie T, McClearn G, Freedman R, Hoffer B.
The recently discovered profound differential sensitivity of cerebellar Purkinje 
(P) cells in long-sleep (LS) verus short-sleep (SS) mice to the depressant 
effects of locally applied ethanol was extended in this study.
First, the 
sensitivity of Purkinje neurons from HS mice (an outbred stock of mice from 
which the LS and SS lines were derived), was found to be almost exactly 
intermediate between the values for the long-sleep and short-sleep animals.
Second, no differential sensitivity in long-sleep versus short-sleep hippocampal 
pyramidal neurons was observed.
This was true using both spontaneous and evoked 
activity.
Third, no differential sensitivity of P cells was seen in long- versus 
short-sleep mice with local application of halothane.
Taken together with 
previous reports, these data strongly suggest that whatever genetically 
determined central nervous alterations result in the differential soporific 
effects of ethanol in the two (LS and SS) mouse lines, such alterations are 
brain region- and depressant drug-specific rather than generalized.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(81)90248-3
PMID: 7193886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Experimental Tribulus terrestris poisoning in sheep: clinical
 laboratory and pathological findings.
1.
Vet Res Commun.
2003 Jan;27(1):53-62. doi: 10.1023/a:1022010707704.
Experimental Tribulus terrestris poisoning in sheep: clinical, laboratory and 
pathological findings.
Aslani MR(1), Movassaghi AR, Mohri M, Pedram M, Abavisani A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, Ferdowsi 
University of Mashhad, PO Box 91775-1793, Mashhad, Iran

Eleven native sheep, 1-2 years old, of both sexes were randomly divided into two 
groups, 6 sheep being allocated to the experimental group and 5 serving as 
controls.
The sheep in the experimental group were fed 80% Tribulus terrestris 
and 20% alfalfa hay and wheat straw, while the control sheep were given a 
mixture of 40% alfalfa hay and 60% wheat straw.
Clinical signs of hepatogenous 
photosensitivity were observed from day 11, including reddening and crust 
formation on the muzzle, nose, ears and eyelids, depression, weight loss, 
icterus, conjunctivitis, and yellow discoloration of the urine.
Laboratory 
findings on weekly samples indicated significant differences (p < 0.05) in white 
blood cell count, total plasma protein and fibrinogen, total and direct 
bilirubin, blood urea nitrogen and creatinine concentrations, and aspartate 
aminotransferase and alkaline phosphatase activities.
There were no significant 
differences in the packed cell volume, in the neutrophil, lymphocyte or 
eosinophil counts, or in the serum calcium, phosphorus, potassium, sodium or 
chloride concentrations.
At necropsy of the experimental animals, there were 
various degrees of generalized icterus and the livers were swollen and 
discolored by bile pigment.
Histopathological examination revealed varying 
amounts of crystalloid material in the bile ducts and renal tubules, 
hepatocellular degeneration, biliary fibrosis and proliferation, renal tubular 
necrosis and focal necrosis of cardiac muscle.
DOI: 10.1023/a:1022010707704
PMID: 12625403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Order-Dependent Coincidence Detection in Cerebellar Purkinje Neurons at the Inositol Trisphosphate Receptor <jats:p>Associative long-term depression (LTD) at cerebellar parallel fiber–Purkinje cell synapses is sensitive to the temporal order in which the parallel fiber is coactivated with the climbing fiber input
 but how order sensitivity is achieved is unknown.
Here we show that the cerebellar inositol-1,4,5-trisphosphate (IP<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>) receptor, whose activation is required for LTD induction, is sensitive<jats:italic>in situ</jats:italic>to the order of presentation of its coagonists, IP<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>and cytoplasmic calcium.
By focally photolyzing a novel caged IP<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>compound in dendritic spines, we find that pairing IP<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>with climbing fiber-mediated calcium entry leads to a large calcium release transient if the climbing fiber is activated up to 100 ms before or up to 500 ms after IP<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>uncaging.
This asymmetric timing window for coactivation follows the kinetics of calcium removal and IP<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>unbinding from the receptor and is not limited by IP<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>metabolism.
IP<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>receptor binding thus acts as an eligibility trace that can drive temporal order-dependent calcium release and LTD induction in Purkinje cells and event order-dependent sensory plasticity in the whole animal.</jats:p>
Acute effects of two melanocytolytic agents
 hydroquinone and β-mercaptoethanolamine, upon tyrosinase activity and cyclic nucleotide levels in murine melanomas 1.
Chem Biol Interact.
1980 Oct;32(1-2):195-208. doi:
10.1016/0009-2797(80)90078-2.
Acute effects of two melanocytolytic agents, hydroquinone and 
beta-mercaptoethanolamine, upon tyrosinase activity and cyclic nucleotide levels 
in murine melanomas.
Abramowitz J, Chavin W.

The acute in vitro actions of two potent melanocytolytic agents, hydroquinone 
(HQ) and beta-mercaptoethanolamine (MEA), were determined in the B-16, Cloudman 
S-91 and Harding-Passey (HP) murine melanomas grown in vivo.
Drug treated 
melanoma dice (5--480 min) were analyzed for tyrosinase activity and cyclic 
nucleotide levels (cAMP, cGMP).
HQ and MEA effects on tyrosinase activity are 
complex and vary with tumor type, duration of treatment and agent tested.
MEA or 
HQ inhibited B-16 tyrosinase activity.
With combined drug therapy, low 
concentrations of MEA plus HQ stimulate B-16 tyrosinase activity while high 
concentrations of the drugs have little effect on enzymatic activity.
MEA 
depresses tyrosinase activity while HQ elevates enzymatic activity in the S-19 
melanoma.
Both high and low concentrations of the combined drugs (MEA plus HQ) 
elicit the same response, stimulation at 10 min followed by continued depression 
of tyrosinase activity for the remainder of the 4 h study period.
MEA initially 
stimulates HP tyrosinase activity followed by depression of enzymic activity.
In 
contrast, HQ initially depresses HP tyrosinase activity followed by stimulation 
of enzyme activity.
In combination the drugs inhibit HP tyrosinase activity.
The 
effects of MEA and/or HQ on murine melanoma cyclic nucleotide levels are equally 
complex.
MEA or HQ elevate cAMP and cGMP levels in all three tumors with the 
exception of S-91 cGMP levels which are not altered.
In combination the drugs 
increase cyclic nucleotide levels in each of the three tumor types but at 
different times.
No correlation is present between cyclic nucleotide levels and 
tyrosinase activity.
Thus, the action of increased cyclic nucleotide levels in 
melanogenesis can not be separated from the direct actions of MEA and HQ upon 
melanogenesis.
The divergent effects of MEA and/or HQ on tyrosinase activity and 
cyclic nucleotide levels in these melanomas are not correlated with the known in 
vivo melanocytolytic activity of these drugs.
Thus, these parameters appear to 
be inadequate indicators of melanoma cell viability in chemotherapeutic 
screening of drugs effective in destroying malignant melanoma.
DOI: 10.1016/0009-2797(80)90078-2
PMID: 6253089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
No evidence for <scp>MHC</scp> class I‐based disassortative mating in a wild population of great tits <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Genes of the major histocompatibility complex (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content>) are regarded as a potentially important target of mate choice due to the fitness benefits that may be conferred to the offspring. According to the <jats:italic>complementary genes hypothesis</jats:italic>
 females mate with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> dissimilar males to enhance the immunocompetence of their offspring or to avoid inbreeding depression.
Here, we investigate whether selection favours a preference for maximally dissimilar or optimally dissimilar <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> class I types, based on <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> genotypes, average amino acid distances and the functional properties of the antigen‐binding sites (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> supertypes); and whether <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> type dissimilarity predicts relatedness between mates in a wild great tit population.
In particular, we explore the role that <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> class I plays in female mate choice decisions while controlling for relatedness and spatial population structure, and examine the reproductive fitness consequences of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> compatibility between mates.
We find no evidence for the hypotheses that females select mates on the basis of either maximal or optimal <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> class I dissimilarity.
A weak correlation between <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> supertype sharing and relatedness suggests that <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> dissimilarity at functional variants may not provide an effective index of relatedness.
Moreover, the reproductive success of pairs did not vary with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> dissimilarity.
Our results provide no support for the suggestion that selection favours, or that mate choice realizes, a preference for complimentary <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MHC</jats:styled-content> types.</jats:p>
8-Bromo-cAMP blocks opioid activation of a voltage-gated potassium current in isolated hippocampal neurons 1. Neurosci Lett. 1992 Mar 16;137(1):137-40. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(92)90316-y.

8-Bromo-cAMP blocks opioid activation of a voltage-gated potassium current in 
isolated hippocampal neurons.

Wimpey TL(1)
 Chavkin C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Washington School of Medicine, 
Seattle 98195.
We have previously shown that mu-selective opioid agonists activate both an 
inward rectifying and a voltage-gated potassium conductance in acutely 
dissociated non-pyramidal neurons from rat hippocampus.
We now report that the 
opioid-activated voltage-gated potassium conductance was blocked by the membrane 
permeable cAMP analogue 8-bromo-cAMP.
In contrast, 8-bromo-cGMP failed to 
inhibit opioid activation of the voltage-gated potassium current.
These results 
suggest that the opioid-activated potassium channel is regulated by 
cAMP-dependent phosphorylation.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(92)90316-y
PMID: 1320750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Calcium Waves Precede Electrophysiological Changes of Spreading Depression in Hippocampal Organ Cultures <jats:p>Although intercellular Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>waves resemble spreading depression (SD) and occur in hippocampal organ cultures (HOTCs)
 SD has not been reported in these cultures.
Accordingly, electrophysiological and Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>imaging techniques were used to examine potential interrelations between Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>waves and electrophysiological changes of SD.
Our results show, for the first time, that HOTCs can support SD.
Furthermore, two distinct Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>waves were found to precede SD.
The first traveled &gt;100 μm/sec along the pyramidal cell dendritic layer.
The second subsequently traveled mostly perpendicular to the pyramidal cell layer from CA3 (or CA1) but also in all directions from its area of initiation.
This second, slower wave spread with the interstitial DC change of SD at millimeters per minute but always ahead of it by 6–16 sec.
Heptanol, which uncouples gap junctions, blocked both of these Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>waves and SD.
Thus, two types of Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>waves occur with the initiation and propagation of SD.
The first might reflect interneuronal changes linked by gap junctions, whereas the second might stem from interastrocyte changes linked via similar connections.
Because individual cells can be followed in space and time for protracted periods in HOTCs, this preparation may be ideal for studies designed to explore not only the mechanisms of SD but also the long-term consequences of SD, such as ischemic tolerance.</jats:p>
Synaptic dynamics: Linear model and adaptation algorithm 1. Annu Int Conf IEEE Eng Med Biol Soc. 2012;2012:1362-5. doi: 
10.1109/EMBC.2012.6346191.

Synaptic dynamics: Linear model and adaptation algorithm.

Yousefi A(1)
 Dibazar AA, Berger TW.
Author information:
(1)Neural Dynamics Laboratory, University of Southern California, USA.
ayousefi@usc.edu

Linear model for synapse temporal dynamics and learning algorithm for synaptic 
adaptation in spiking neural networks are presented.
The proposed linear model 
substantially simplifies analysis and training of spiking neural networks, 
meanwhile accurately models facilitation and depression dynamics in synapse.
The 
learning rule is biologically plausible and is capable of simultaneously 
adjusting both of LTP and STP parameters of individual synapses in a network.
To 
prove efficiency of the system, a small size spiking neural network is trained 
for generating different spike and bursting patterns of cortical neurons.
The 
simulation results revealed that the linear model of synaptic dynamics along 
with the proposed STDP based learning algorithm can provide a practical tool for 
simulating and training very large scale spiking neural circuitry comprising of 
significant number of synapses and neurons.
DOI: 10.1109/EMBC.2012.6346191
PMID: 23366152 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cytokine production-suppressive effect by macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF). 1. Res Commun Mol Pathol Pharmacol. 1996 Feb;91(2):161-72.

Cytokine production-suppressive effect by macrophage colony-stimulating factor 
(M-CSF).

Kojima K(1)
 Naomoto Y, Hizuta A, Tanaka N, Orita K.

Author information:
(1)First Department of Surgery, Okayama University Medical School, Japan.
Macrophage colony-stimulating factor (M-CSF) is a protein which is necessary for 
proliferation and differentiation of monocyte-macrophage precursor cells.
We 
examined the effect of M-CSF on the cytokine production using BCG sensitized 
mice in vivo.
On Day 0, BCG 1 mg/mouse was injected via the tail vein.
Starting 
from Day 2, M-CSF 30 mu g/mouse (1 X 10(8) U/mg) was injected every 2 days for a 
total of six times (Day 2, 4, 6, 8, 10 and 12).
On Day 14.
LPS 25 mu g/mouse was 
injected via the tail vein, and Interferon (IFN)/Tumor necrosis factor-alpha 
(TNF-alpha) in serum were determined.
The productions of IFN and TNF-alpha were 
suppressed significantly.
These cytokine production-suppressive effects of M-CSF 
were found also in the in vitro experimental system using spleen cells 
collected.
On Day 14, spleen cells were collected and adjusted to 5 X 10(6) 
cells/ml.
20 micro-grams of LPS was added to 2ml of spleen cells and they were 
incubated in a C02 incubator for 24 hours.
IFN and TNF-alpha in the supernatant 
were determined.
In the experiment using nude mice, the cytokine suppressive 
effect of M-CSF was not observed.
MLR test was performed with spleen cells of 
C57BL/6 treated with M-CSF as the responder cells, and spleen cells of C3H were 
treated with mitomycin C as the stimulator cells.
MLR was suppressed 
significantly by administration of M-CSF.
These results might possibly reflect 
the actual effect of M-CSF in the living body, and the T-cell and cellular 
immunity might be concerned with the mechanism of the cytokine 
production-suppressive effect of M-CSF.
PMID: 8832908 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sperm RNA carries marks of trauma 1. Nature. 2014 Apr 17;508(7496):296-7. doi: 10.1038/508296a.

Sperm RNA carries marks of trauma.

Hughes V.

DOI: 10.1038/508296a
PMID: 24740043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adenosine pre- and postsynaptic modulation of glutamate-dependent calcium activity in hypothalamic neurons <jats:p> 1. Within the hypothalamus
 adenosine has been reported to influence temperature regulation, sleep homeostasis, and endocrine secretions.
The effects of adenosine on hypothalamic neurons have not been studied at the cellular level.
Adenosine (5 nM-30 microM) showed no influence on intracellular Ca2+ or electrical activity in the presence of glutamate receptor antagonists D-2-amino-5-phosphonovalerate and 6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione; consequently, we examined the role of adenosine in modulating the activity of glutamate in cultured hypothalamic neurons (n &gt; 1,700) with fura-2 Ca2+ digital imaging and whole cell patch-clamp electrophysiology in the absence of glutamate receptor block.
2.
When glutamate receptors were not blocked, adenosine (1-30 microM) and the selective adenosine A1 receptor agonist N6-cyclopentyl adenosine (CPA; 5 nM-1 microM) caused a large reduction in intracellular Ca2+ and electrical activity, suggesting that glutamate neurotransmission was critical for an effect of adenosine to be detected.
Neuronal Ca2+ levels were reversibly depressed by CPA (50 nM), with a maximum depression of 90%, and these effects were blocked by coadministration of the A1 receptor antagonist 8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine (DPCPX).
3.
Ca2+ levels in immature neurons before the time of synaptogenesis were not affected by adenosine.
Adenosine A1 receptor activation suppressed glutamate-mediated Ca2+ activity in neurons in vitro 8 to 73 days.
4.
Adenosine (1 or 10 microM) caused a hyperpolarization of membrane potential and a reduction of large postsynaptic potentials arising from endogenously released glutamate.
The administration of low concentrations of CPA (5 nM) decreased the frequency of glutamate-mediated, neuronally synchronized Ca2+ transients and the frequency of postsynaptic potentials.
5.
To compare the relative effects of adenosine on hypothalamic neurons with cells from other brain regions, we assayed the effects of CPA on glutamate-mediated Ca2+ in hippocampal and cortical cultures.
CPA (50 nM) reversibly depressed glutamate-mediated Ca2+ rises in hypothalamic neurons by 35%, compared with 54% in hippocampal neurons and 46% in cortical neurons.
6.
If it does play a functional role, adenosine should be released by hypothalamic cells.
In some neurons the adenosine A1 receptor antagonists cyclopentyltheophylline or DPCPX caused an increase in intracellular Ca2+, suggesting that adenosine was secreted by hypothalamic cells, tonically depressing glutamate-enhanced neuronal Ca2+.
7.
To determine whether adenosine could exert a postsynaptic effect, we coapplied it with glutamate agonists in the presence of tetrodotoxin.
Within subpopulations of hypothalamic neurons, adenosine and CPA either inhibited (18% of total neurons) or potentiated (6% of total neurons) responses to glutamate, N-methyl-D-aspartate, and kainate by &gt; or = 20%.
8.
In contrast to the modest effects found in neurons, responses of hypothalamic astrocytes to the application of glutamate or the metabotropic glutamate receptor agonist (+/-)-trans-1-amino-1,3-cyclopentanedicarboxylic acid were strongly potentiated by adenosine (mean +225%) and CPA.
9.
Together, these findings suggest that adenosine exerts a major presynaptic effect and a minor postsynaptic effect in the modulation of glutamate neurotransmission in the hypothalamus, where it can play a significant role in blocking a large part of the glutamate-induced Ca2+ rise.
In the absence of glutamate transmission, adenosine has relatively little effect on either neuronal intracellular Ca2+ or electrical activity.
</jats:p>
Spatial
 contextual and working memory are not affected by the absence of mossy fiber long-term potentiation and depression 1.
Behav Brain Res.
2003 Jan 22;138(2):215-23. doi:
10.1016/s0166-4328(02)00243-7.
Spatial, contextual and working memory are not affected by the absence of mossy 
fiber long-term potentiation and depression.
Hensbroek RA(1), Kamal A, Baars AM, Verhage M, Spruijt BM.
Author information:
(1)Rudolf Magnus Institute for Neurosciences, Utrecht University Medical Center, 
Universiteitsweg 100, 3584CG Utrecht, The Netherlands.
The mossy fibers of the hippocampus display NMDA-receptor independent long-term 
plasticity.
A number of studies addressed the role of mossy fiber long-term 
plasticity in memory, but have provided contrasting results.
Here, we have 
exploited a genetic model, the rab3A null-mutant, which is characterized by the 
absence of both mossy fiber long-term potentiation and long-term depression.
This mutant was backcrossed to 129S3/SvImJ and C57Bl/6J to obtain standardized 
genetic backgrounds.
Spatial working memory, assessed in the eight-arm radial 
maze, was unchanged in rab3A null-mutants.
Moreover, one-trial cued and 
contextual fear conditioning was normal.
Long-term spatial memory was tested in 
the Morris water maze.
Two different versions of this task were used, an 'easy' 
version and a 'difficult' one.
On both versions, no differences in search time 
and quadrant preferences were observed.
Thus, despite the elimination of mossy 
fiber long-term plasticity, these tests revealed no impairments in mnemonic 
capabilities.
We conclude that spatial, contextual and working memory do not 
depend on mossy fiber plasticity.
DOI: 10.1016/s0166-4328(02)00243-7
PMID: 12527452 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Attachment
 Social Support, and Responses following the Death of a Companion Animal <jats:p> This research tested hypotheses concerning attachment, social support, and grief responses to the loss of animal companionship.
Participants whose companion cat or dog had recently died ( N = 429) completed the Attachment Style Questionnaire, the Inventory of Complicated Grief, and the Multidimensional Health Profile-Psychosocial Functioning questionnaires.
Both attachment anxiety and attachment avoidance were found to be positively associated with respondents' grief, depression, anxiety, and somatic symptoms.
Social support was found to be negatively associated with these outcomes as well as with attachment anxiety and attachment avoidance.
In multiple regression analyses, attachment anxiety incrementally predicted grief, anxiety and somatic symptoms, attachment avoidance incrementally predicted grief and depression, and social support incrementally predicted all outcomes.
Interaction effects of attachment and social support in relation to outcomes were not found.
The present study's implications and limitations are discussed, as are directions for future research.
</jats:p>
Effect of Intravenously Infused Dexamethasone on Collagen Metabolism in Skin of Merino Sheep <jats:p>The effects of an 8-day intravenous infusion of dexamethasone (7�6 mg kg-o.75 body weight) on collagen biosynthes's and wool growth in skin were examined in four Merino wethers.</jats:p>
Blood-brain barrier breach following cortical contusion in the rat <jats:p content-type="fine-print">✓ Adult Fisher 344 rats were subjected to a unilateral impact to the dorsal cortex above the hippocampus at 3.5 m/second
 resulting in a 2-mm cortical depression.
This caused severe cortical damage and neuronal loss in hippocampus subfields CA1, CA3, and hilus.
Breakdown of the blood-brain barrier (BBB) was assessed by injecting the protein horseradish peroxidase (HRP) 5 minutes prior to or at various times after injury (5 minutes, 1, 3, 6, and 12 hours, 1, 2, 5, and 10 days).
Animals were killed 1 hour after HRP injection and brain sections were reacted with diaminobenzidine to visualize extravascular accumulation of the protein.
Maximum staining occurred in animals injected with HRP 5 minutes prior to or 5 minutes after cortical contusion.
Staining at these time points was observed in the ipsilateral cortex of the impact area and areas adjacent to it, as well as in the ipsilateral hippocampus.
Some modest staining occurred in the dorsal contralateral cortex near the superior sagittal sinus.
Cortical HRP staining gradually decreased at increasing time intervals postinjury.
By 10 days, no HRP staining was observed in any area of the brain.
In the ipsilateral hippocampus, HRP staining was absent by 3 hours postinjury and remained so at the 6- and 12-hour time points.
Surprisingly, HRP staining was again observed in the ipsilateral hippocampus 1 and 2 days after cortical contusion, indicating a biphasic opening of the BBB following head trauma and a possible second wave of secondary brain damage days after the contusion injury.
These data indicate that regions not initially destroyed by cortical impact, but evidencing BBB breach, may be accessible to neurotrophic factors administered intravenously both immediately and days after brain trauma.</jats:p>
Imidazoline receptor proteins are regulated in platelet-precursor MEG-01 cells by agonists and antagonists 1. J Psychiatr Res. 1998 Mar-Apr;32(2):65-79. doi: 10.1016/S0022-3956(98)00006-5.

Imidazoline receptor proteins are regulated in platelet-precursor MEG-01 cells 
by agonists and antagonists.

Ivanov TR(1)
 Feng Y, Wang H, Regunathan S, Reis DJ, Chikkala DN, Gupta P, Jones 
JC, Piletz JE.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Human Behavior, University of Mississippi 
Medical Center, Jackson 39216-4505, USA.
The I1-imidazoline receptor is a novel brainstem modulator of sympathetic 
outflow that is elevated on platelets and in brains of depressed patients.
A 
positive correlation has been reported (accompanying manuscript) between plasma 
norepinephrine (NE) concentrations and the densities (Bmax) of platelet I1 
binding sites (I1 sites).
I1-candidate proteins of 33 kDa and 85 kDa are now 
identified on Western blots probed with anti-imidazoline receptor antiserum 
(IRBP antiserum), that correlate with Bmax values for I1 sites.
Furthermore, a 
human megakaryoblastoma cell line (MEG-01) has been used to study the regulation 
of these proteins on megakaryocytic cells, while bovine adrenal chromaffin cells 
provide a standard I1 cell type for comparison.
Both the 33 kDa and 85 kDa 
IRBP-immunoreactive bands were enriched in plasma membrane fractions.
IRBP 
antiserum did not cross-react with I2 imidazoline binding sites located on 
platelet mitochondrial membranes.
The 85 kDa band was enhanced under conditions 
lacking fetal bovine serum (FBS) from the culture medium 6 h prior to 
harvesting.
Conversely, 33 kDa protein was enhanced on MEG-01 cells grown in the 
presence of 10% FBS; suggesting that a precursor (85 kDa) and product (33 kDa) 
relationship might be induced by serum.
The 85 kDa band was robustly 
up-regulated in response to imidazoline receptor-sensitive ligands; moxonidine, 
idazoxan and agmatine (10 microM each for 6 h).
NE also up-regulated the 85 kDa 
IRBP-immunoreactive protein on MEG-01 membranes, but to a lesser extent.
Idazoxan, an imidazoline alpha 2-antagonist, off-set its induction of 85 kDa 
protein by reducing the 33 kDa band.
Yohimbine, a non-imidazoline alpha 
2-antagonist, was ineffective alone, or in combination with moxonidine (up to 40 
microM), but yohimbine blocked NE's induction of the 85 kDa band.
Therefore, a 
rise in either plasma NE and/or endogenous I-site ligands (i.e.
agmatine) could 
explain an elevation of imidazoline receptors observed in depression.
DOI: 10.1016/S0022-3956(98)00006-5
PMID: 9694002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Glutamate Transporter Mediated Increase of Antitumor Activity by Theanine
 an Amino Acid in Green Tea 1.
Yakugaku Zasshi.
2002 Nov;122(11):995-9. doi: 10.1248/yakushi.122.995.
[Glutamate transporter mediated increase of antitumor activity by theanine, an 
amino acid in green tea].
[Article in Japanese]

Sadzuka Y(1), Yamashita Y, Kishimoto S, Fukushima S, Takeuchi Y, Sonobe T.

Author information:
(1)University of Shizuoka, 52-1 Yada, Shizuoka 422-8526, Japan.
sadzuka@u-shizuoka-ken.ac.jp

We have confirmed that theanine, a major amino acid in green tea, enhances the 
antitumor activity of doxorubicin (DOX) without an increase in DOX-induced side 
effects.
We believe that the action of theanine is due to decreases in glutamate 
uptake via inhibition of the glutamate transporter, intracellular glutathione 
(GSH) synthesis, GS-DOX conjugate level, and subsequent extracellular transport 
of GS-DOX by the MRP5/GS-X pump.
To increase the clinical usefulness of 
theanine, we examined its effects on the antitumor activity of cisplatin and 
irinotecan (CPT-11), which a known to be transported by the efflux system 
related to MRP.
Cisplatin decreased tumor volume in M5076 tumor-bearing mice.
Furthermore, the combination of theanine with cisplatin increased the decrease 
in tumor volume as compared with the cisplatin-alone group.
Tumor volume in the 
CPT-11-alone group did not show a decrease, but the combination of theanine with 
CPT-11 significantly reduced tumor volume.
The concentration of cisplatin in the 
tumor was significantly increased by combination with theanine, and thus we 
assume that it correlated with the enhancement on the antitumor activity of 
theanine.
On the other hand, changes in drug concentrations with theanine were 
not observed in normal tissues, but rather it is indicated that theanine tends 
to reduce their concentrations.
Therefore theanine enhances the antitumor 
activity not only of DOX but also of cisplatin or CPT-11.
DOI: 10.1248/yakushi.122.995
PMID: 12440157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hypocretin/orexin prevents recovery from sickness 1. Biomed Rep. 2015 Sep;3(5):648-650. doi: 10.3892/br.2015.491. Epub 2015 Jul 17.

Hypocretin/orexin prevents recovery from sickness.

Tanaka S(1)
 Toyoda H(2), Honda Y(3), Seki Y(3), Sakurai T(4), Honda K(3), 
Kodama T(3).
Author information:
(1)Sleep Disorders Project, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, 
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan ; 
Department of Anatomy and Cell Science, Kansai Medical University, Hirakata, 
Osaka 573-1010, Japan.
(2)Sleep Disorders Project, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, 
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan ; 
Department of Human Genetics, Graduate School of Medicine, The University of 
Tokyo, Tokyo 113-0033, Japan.
(3)Sleep Disorders Project, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, 
Tokyo Metropolitan Institute of Medical Science, Tokyo 156-8506, Japan.
(4)Department of Molecular Neuroscience and Integrative Physiology, Faculty of 
Medicine, Kanazawa University, Kanazawa, Ishikawa 920-8640, Japan ; 
International Institute for Integrative Sleep Medicine, University of Tsukuba, 
Tsukuba, Ibaraki 305-8577, Japan.
Sickness behavior is defined as states of lethargy, depression, anxiety, loss of 
appetite, hypersomnia, hyperalgesia, reduction of grooming and failure to 
concentrate that can be induced by inflammatory diseases, such as infections and 
cancer.
Recent findings revealed that the lipopolysaccharide (LPS) injection 
causes lethargy as a consequence of the inhibition of hypocretin signaling.
The 
hypocretin system maintains the vigilance state in various physiological 
processes.
In order to investigate the sleep arousal system against sickness 
behavior, LPS-induced sickness behavior was examined in hypocretin-ataxin-3 
transgenic mice, whose hypocretin neurons were postnatally ablated.
Sleep-wake 
activity was determined following the administration of LPS at Zeitgeber time 
(ZT) 8.0 in ataxin-3 transgenic mice, and the age-, gender-matched wild-type 
littermates.
LPS injection induced increases in non-rapid eye movement (REM) 
sleep in the matched wild-type littermates.
In addition, a further increase in 
periods of sleep according to the loss of hypocretin neurons was identified in 
the ataxin-3 transgenic mice.
A marked reduction of awakening during ZT12-ZT18 
was observed as expected following LPS injection in the mouse lines.
The 
increase in the period of non-REM sleep was not observed on the next day 
following LPS administration in either of the mouse lines.
Complete recovery of 
physical activity was not observed in the matched wild-type littermates.
Ataxin-3 transgenic mice recovered their physical activity to the same level as 
that on the first day before LPS administration.
These results suggest the 
possibility that a faster recovery is the result of deeper resting according to 
the absence of hypocretin neurons, as ataxin-3 transgenic mice demonstrated more 
non-REM sleep.
DOI: 10.3892/br.2015.491
PMCID: PMC4534883
PMID: 26405539
Effect of angiotensin II on total plasma protein and albumin content in dogs. 1. Indian J Physiol Pharmacol. 1977 Apr-Jun;21(2):129-32.

Effect of angiotensin II on total plasma protein and albumin content in dogs.

Singh KN
 Singh M, Misra V.

Intravenous administration of angiotensin II caused a significant decrease in 
total plasma protein and albumin level in dogs.
The central nervous system, the 
spleen and adrenal glands do not play any significant role in decreased plasma 
protein and albumin level.
It is suggested that might be due to increased 
secretion of prostaglandin-like substances from the dog kidney causing increased 
permeability of vascularendothelium.
PMID: 885597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Addition of Exogenous NAD+ Prevents Mefloquine-Induced Neuroaxonal and Hair Cell Degeneration through Reduction of Caspase-3-Mediated Apoptosis in Cochlear Organotypic Cultures 1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 6;8(11):e79817. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079817. 
eCollection 2013.

Addition of exogenous NAD+ prevents mefloquine-induced neuroaxonal and hair cell 
degeneration through reduction of caspase-3-mediated apoptosis in cochlear 
organotypic cultures.

Ding D(1)
 Qi W, Yu D, Jiang H, Han C, Kim MJ, Katsuno K, Hsieh YH, Miyakawa T, 
Salvi R, Tanokura M, Someya S.

Author information:
(1)Center for Hearing and Deafness, State University of New York at Buffalo, 
Buffalo, New York, United States of America ; Sixth People's Hospital, Shanghai 
Oriental Otolaryngology Institute, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai, 
China ; Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha, Hunan, China ; 
Department of Applied Biological Chemistry, University of Tokyo, Yayoi, Tokyo, 
Japan.
BACKGROUND: Mefloquine is widely used for the treatment of malaria.
However, 
this drug is known to induce neurological side effects including depression, 
anxiety, balance disorder, and sensorineural hearing loss.
Yet, there is 
currently no treatment for these side effects.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In this study, we show that the coenzyme NAD(+), known to 
play a critical role in maintaining the appropriate cellular redox environment, 
protects cochlear axons and sensory hair cells from mefloquine-induced 
degeneration in cultured rat cochleae.
Mefloquine alone destroyed hair cells and 
nerve fiber axons in rat cochlear organotypics cultures in a dose-dependent 
manner, while treatment with NAD(+) protected axons and hair cells from 
mefloquine-induced degeneration.
Furthermore, cochlear organs treated with 
mefloquine showed increased oxidative stress marker levels, including superoxide 
and protein carbonyl, and increased apoptosis marker levels, including 
TUNEL-positive nuclei and caspases-3.
Treatment with NAD(+) reduced the levels 
of these oxidative stress and apoptosis markers.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: Taken together, our findings suggest that that 
mefloquine disrupts the cellular redox environment and induces oxidative stress 
in cochlear hair cells and nerve fibers leading to caspases-3-mediated apoptosis 
of these structures.
Exogenous NAD(+) suppresses mefloquine-induced oxidative 
stress and prevents the degeneration of cochlear axons and sensory hair cells 
caused by mefloquine treatment.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079817
PMCID: PMC3819247
PMID: 24223197 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Long-term Habituation of the Smile Response with Deep Brain Stimulation 1. Neurocase. 2006 Jun;12(3):191-6. doi: 10.1080/13554790600646995.

Long-term habituation of the smile response with deep brain stimulation.

Springer US(1)
 Bowers D, Goodman WK, Shapira NA, Foote KD, Okun MS.
Author information:
(1)Clinical and Health Psychology, McKnight Brain Institute, University of 
Florida, Gainsville, Florida 32610-0165, USA.
uspring@ufl.edu

Human and animal research has shown that the ventral striatum, including the 
nucleus accumbens, may play a critical role in mediating positive emotions.
Recently we described a subject with obsessive-compulsive disorder who 
intra-operatively exhibited the acute onset of an asymmetric smile and acute 
positive emotional change with contralateral deep brain stimulation (DBS) in 
either the right or left nucleus accumbens and anterior limb of the internal 
capsule region.
The purpose of the present study was to examine the stability of 
the stimulation-induced smile(s) over a 12-month period.
Custom computer 
software objectively quantified left and right facial movement during DBS.
Although stimulation-induced smiles were elicited at one and two months 
post-surgery, they were no longer present from 3-12 months following chronic 
high frequency DBS.
The smiles could not be elicited even with long washout 
periods.
These findings imply potential long-term habituation and changes in the 
neural chemistry (possibly neuroplasticity) induced by chronic DBS.
DOI: 10.1080/13554790600646995
PMCID: PMC7063676
PMID: 16801154 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Immobilization of Wyoming Bears Using Carfentanil and Xylazine 1. J Wildl Dis. 2013 Jul;49(3):674-8. doi: 10.7589/2012-10-269.

Immobilization of Wyoming bears using carfentanil and xylazine.

Kreeger TJ(1)
 Bjornlie D, Thompson D, Clapp J, Clark C, Hansen C, Huizenga M, 
Lockwood S.

Author information:
(1)Wyoming Game and Fish Department, 2362 Highway 34, Wheatland, Wyoming 82201, 
USA.
tkreeg@gmail.com

Seven grizzly (Ursus arctos; four male, three female) and three black (Ursus 
americanus; two male, one female) bears caught in culvert traps or leg snares 
were immobilized in northwestern Wyoming with carfentanil and xylazine at doses, 
respectively, of 0.011 ± 0.001 and 0.12 ± 0.01 mg/kg for grizzly bears and 0.014 
± 0.002 and 0.15 ± 0.04 mg/kg for black bears.
These drugs were antagonized with 
1 mg/kg naltrexone and 2 mg/kg tolazoline.
Induction and recovery times, 
respectively, were 4.3 ± 0.5 and 7.1 ± 0.8 min for grizzly bears and 5.2 ± 0.4 
and 9.1 ± 2.2 min for black bears.
Inductions were smooth and uneventful.
Recoveries were characterized initially by increased respiration followed by 
raising of the head, which quickly led to a full recovery, with the bears 
recognizing and avoiding humans and moving away, maneuvering around obstacles.
All bears experienced respiratory depression, which did not significantly 
improve with supplemental oxygen on the basis of pulse oximetry (P=0.56).
Rectal 
temperatures were normothermic.
Carfentanil-xylazine immobilization of bears 
provided significant advantages over other drug regimens, including small drug 
volumes, predictable inductions, quick and complete recoveries, and lower costs.
On the basis of these data, both grizzly and black bears can be immobilized 
effectively with 0.01 mg/kg carfentanil and 0.1 mg/kg xylazine.
DOI: 10.7589/2012-10-269
PMID: 23778620 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of High Doses of Peptichemio upon the Humoral Response to Sheep Erythrocytes and Delayed Hypersensitivity Reactions to Oxazolone in Cba Mice <jats:p> A study has been carried out on the immunosuppressive activity of high doses of peptichemio (PTC) in CBA mice. Humoral response to sheep erythrocytes
 delayed hypersensitivity to oxazolone, and cellular proliferation in lymph nodes and spleen of animals sensitized with oxazolone have been investigated.
The results demonstrated that PTC had a definite immunosuppressive action, as shown by the inhibition of primary response to inoculation of sheep erythrocytes, by depression of delayed hypersensitivity to oxazolone, and by marked inhibition of <jats:sup>125</jats:sup>IUdr incorporation in lymph nodes of sensitized animals.
It is suggested that the inhibitory action is mediated by an effect on actively proliferating B or T lymphoid cells, although involvement of macrophages cannot be ruled out.
</jats:p>
Role of progesterone in luteinizing hormone-induced fibronectin production and deposition by chicken granulosa cells in vitro 1. Comp Biochem Physiol C Pharmacol Toxicol Endocrinol. 1995 Oct;112(2):247-55. 
doi: 10.1016/0742-8413(95)02018-7.

Role of progesterone in luteinizing hormone-induced fibronectin production and 
deposition by chicken granulosa cells in vitro.

Asem EK(1)
 Conkright MD.
Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Purdue University, West Lafayette, IN 
47907, USA.
The role of progesterone in luteinizing hormone- (LH) induced fibronectin 
production and deposition by chicken ovarian granulosa cells was examined in 
vitro.
Granulosa cells isolated from pre-ovulatory follicles of the domestic hen 
ovary were incubated in serum-free Medium 199, and the total amount of 
fibronectin (deposited, secreted into the medium and associated with cells) 
produced was measured by ELISA.
LH increased the amount of fibronectin deposited 
by granulosa cells.
Similarly, it increased the quantity of fibronectin secreted 
into the medium or associated with cells.
Cyanoketone (an inhibitor of 
progesterone synthesis) suppressed dose dependently basal and LH-induced 
fibronectin deposition.
Cyanketone also attenuated the total amount of 
fibronectin produced by control or LH-stimulated granulosa cells.
Exogenous 
progesterone reversed the inhibitory effects of cyanoketone on basal and 
LH-induced fibronectin production and deposition.
The non-degradable synthetic 
progestin R5020 stimulated fibronectin production in a dose-dependent manner.
R5020 also reversed the inhibitory effects of cyanoketone on LH-induced 
fibronectin production and deposition.
The antiprogestin, ZK 98.299, inhibited 
basal and LH-stimulated fibronectin production.
The data demonstrate that 
endogenous progesterone regulates fibronectin production and deposition perhaps 
in an intracrine/autocrine manner.
They indicate that LH-stimulated fibronectin 
production and deposition by chicken granulosa cells is mediated (at least in 
part) by progesterone.
DOI: 10.1016/0742-8413(95)02018-7
PMID: 8788593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Is placebo useful in the treatment of major depression in clinical practice? 1. Neuropsychiatr Dis Treat. 2013;9:915-20. doi: 10.2147/NDT.S44519. Epub 2013
Jun  25.

Is placebo useful in the treatment of major depression in clinical practice?

Marchesi C(1)
 De Panfilis C, Tonna M, Ossola P.

Author information:
(1)University of Parma, Department of Neuroscience, Psychiatric Unit, Parma, 
Italy.
For many years, placebo has been defined by its inert content and use in 
clinical trials.
In recent years, several studies have demonstrated its effect 
in the treatment of major depression.
The aim of this paper is to present the 
conclusions of recent meta-analyses of the placebo effect in major depression, 
to explain the mechanism by which placebo exerts its effect, and to discuss 
whether placebo can be used in the treatment of patients with major depression 
in clinical practice.
Recent meta-analyses have demonstrated that the placebo 
effect is estimated to account for 67% of the treatment effect in patients 
receiving antidepressants, and furthermore that placebo is as effective as 
antidepressants in patients with mild to moderate major depression (reporting a 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale score lower than 25), whereas placebo is less 
effective than antidepressants in severely depressed patients.
However, several 
limitations make the translation of these conclusions into clinical practice 
impracticable.
Clinicians should learn from the "placebo lesson" to maximize the 
nonspecific effects of treatment when they prescribe an antidepressant, 
particularly in less severely depressed patients, who show a higher placebo 
response in randomized controlled trials.
This strategy can increase the 
antidepressant effect and may reduce nonadherence with treatment.
DOI: 10.2147/NDT.S44519
PMCID: PMC3699255
PMID: 23836976
A new species of the rare nematode genus &lt;i&gt;Margollus&lt;/i&gt; Peña-Santiago
 Peralta &amp; Siddiqi, 1993 (Nematoda: Tylencholaimoidea) from Turkey <jats:p>Margollus turcicus sp.
n., is described and illustrated from vineyard soil in Turkey.
The new species is characterized by having a medium sized body (L=1.0–1.2 mm); cuticle with distinct striations; radial refractive elements abundant; lip re-gion distinctly narrower than the adjoining body and slightly offset from the body contour by a depression; cephalic and labial papillae not discernible; strong labial and post-labial sclerotization present; amphids well developed with sclero-tized walls; stylet 27–28.5 μm long, odontophore distinctly flanged, 0.3 times the odontostyle length; pharyngeal bulb off-set by constriction, 33–37 μm long; mono-opisthodelphic female genital system with anterior branch 22–41 μm long; spicules 49 μm long; single weak ventromedian supplement and short hemispheroid tail in both sexes.</jats:p>
beta-Adrenergic activity and cardiovascular response to severe respiratory acidosis <jats:p> The mechanism responsible for the depressive myocardial effects of severe respiratory acidosis is unclear; however
 sympathetic stimulation and catecholamines are known to be involved.
The influence of beta-adrenergic receptor activity on the myocardial response to severe respiratory acidosis was studied in 18 anesthetized, mechanically ventilated dogs.
Arterial CO2 tension (PaCO2) was raised by increasing the inspired CO2 fraction in O2.
In control animals, as PaCO2 increased, heart rate (HR) decreased (PaCO2 approximately 110 mmHg), then returned to control (PaCO2 approximately 220 mmHg), whereas arterial blood pressure (Pa) and cardiac output (Q) remained unchanged from prehypercapnia levels.
At PaCO2 greater than 350 mmHg, Pa, HR, and Q decreased and left ventricular function (LVF) curves were depressed.
Death occurred at a PaCO2 of 404 +/- 25 mmHg (pH 6.48 +/- 0.02).
In a second group of animals, administration of isoproterenol during the increase in PaCO2 did not result in depression of myocardial function, and death did not occur even at a significantly higher PaCO2 (PaCO2 496 +/- 12 mmHg; pH 6.39 +/- 0.02) than in the control group.
Administration of propranolol to a third group of animals as PaCO2 increased did not change Pa, HR, and Q; however, LVF curves indicated a more rapid and severe depression of myocardial performance than in control, and death occurred at a significantly lower PaCO2 (PaCO2 220 +/- 25 mmHg; pH 6.65 +/- 0.02).
We conclude that beta-adrenergic receptor stimulation can prevent hypercapnic heart failure and that beta-adrenergic receptor activity is involved in the mechanism responsible for this failure.
</jats:p>
Metaplastic control of the endocannabinoid system at inhibitory synapses in hippocampus <jats:p>
            The modifiability of neuronal response plasticity is called “metaplasticity.” In suppressing synaptic inhibition and facilitating induction of long-term excitatory synaptic plasticity
 endocannabinoids (eCBs) act as agents of metaplasticity.
We now report the discovery of a calcium-dependent mechanism that regulates eCB mobilization by metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) activation.
The switch-like mechanism primes cells to release eCBs and requires a transient rise in intracellular Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            concentration ([Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            ]
            <jats:sub>i</jats:sub>
            ) but not concurrent activation of mGluRs.
Conversely, short-term, [Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            ]
            <jats:sub>i</jats:sub>
            - dependent eCB release can be persistently enhanced by mGluR activation.
Hence, eCBs are also objects of metaplasticity, subject to higher levels of physiological control.
</jats:p>
Metabotropic glutamate receptors modulate feedback inhibition in a developmentally regulated manner in rat dentate gyrus <jats:p>We investigated group II metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) modulation of glutamatergic input onto hilar‐border interneurones and its regulation of feedback inhibition in the dentate gyrus. Selective activation of group II mGluRs with (2<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>
2′<jats:italic>R</jats:italic>,3′<jats:italic>R</jats:italic>)‐2‐(2′,3′‐dicarboxycyclopropyl)glycine (DCG‐IV) depressed mossy fibre (MF)‐evoked excitatory drive to these interneurones with significantly greater depression in juvenile than adult rats.
During 20 Hz MF stimulus trains, EPSCs became depressed.
Depression during the early, but not later part of the train was significantly greater in juvenile than adult rats and was blocked by the mGluR antagonist (2<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>)‐2‐amino‐2‐[(1<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>,2<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>)‐2‐carboxycycloprop‐1‐yl]‐3‐(xanth‐9‐yl) propanoic acid (LY341495).
In dentate granule cells from juvenile rats polysynaptic feedback IPSCs, but not monosynaptic IPSCs, were strongly suppressed by DCG‐IV.
DCG‐IV also suppressed feedback inhibition of perforant path‐evoked population spikes.
In contrast, in adult animals DCG‐IV did not significantly depress feedback inhibition.
During 20 Hz stimulus trains in juvenile animals the summation of polysynaptic, but not monosynaptic IPSCs was suppressed by synaptically activated group II mGluRs.
Blockade of these mGluRs with LY341495 significantly increased the area and duration of the summated IPSC, causing greater feedback inhibition of granule cell firing.
In contrast, in adult animals LY341495 did not alter feedback inhibition following the stimulus train.
These findings indicate that group II mGluRs modulate excitatory drive to interneurones in a developmentally regulated manner and thereby modulate feedback inhibition in the dentate gyrus.</jats:p>
Apomorphine and 7-OH DPAT reduce ethanol intake of P and HAD rats 1. Alcohol. 1996 Sep-Oct;13(5):515-9. doi: 10.1016/0741-8329(95)00062-3.

Apomorphine and 7-OH DPAT reduce ethanol intake of P and HAD rats.

Russell RN(1)
 McBride WJ, Lumeng L, Li TK, Murphy JM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Purdue School of Science, Indianapolis, IN 
46202-3275, USA.
Adult male rats of the alcohol-preferring (P) line (N = 10) and high alcohol 
drinking (HAD) line (N = 12) were used to study the effects of IP administration 
of 0.125-0.50 mg/kg 7-OH DPAT (a putative D agonist) and 0.25-1.0 mg/kg 
apomorphine (a dopamine agonist with 50-fold higher affinities for the D1 and D2 
receptors than for the D3 receptor) on the concurrent intakes of 10% (v/v) 
ethanol and 0.0125% (g/v) saccharin during a daily 4-h scheduled access period.
Control intakes by the P rats for the 4-h period were 17.9 +/- 0.5 and 7.2 +/- 
0.4 ml for the ethanol and saccharin solutions, respectively.
For the HAD line, 
ethanol consumption was 18.7 +/- 0.2 ml and saccharin intake was 8.7 +/- 1.6 ml 
for the 4-h period.
In terms of grams ethanol/kg body wt, the 4-h intakes were 
2.2 +/- 0.2 for the P line and 3.0 +/- 0.3 for the HAD rats.
Both P and HAD rats 
consumed approximately 40% of their total ethanol intake in the first 15 min of 
access while consuming only about 15% of their total saccharin intake during 
this 15-min period.
The putative D3 agonist 7-OH DPAT produced a decrease in 
ethanol intake in the first h to 45-55% of control levels for the P rat (p < 
0.01) and to 25-70% of control values in the HAD line (p < 0.001).
Apomorphine 
caused a dose-dependent decrease in ethanol intake in the first hour to 15-70% 
of control values in the P rat (p < 0.001) and to 25-60% of control levels in 
the HAD line (p < 0.001).
Saccharin and 4-h food intakes for both lines were not 
altered by either 7-OH DPAT or apomorphine.
Overall, these results suggest that 
D2 and D3 dopamine receptors may play a role in mediating alcohol drinking 
behavior of the selectively bred HAD and P lines of rats.
DOI: 10.1016/0741-8329(95)00062-3
PMID: 8888949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Compensatory Growth Impairs Adult Cognitive Performance 1. PLoS Biol. 2006 Jul;4(8):e251. doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040251.

Compensatory growth impairs adult cognitive performance.

Fisher MO(1)
 Nager RG, Monaghan P.

Author information:
(1)Division of Environmental Evolutionary Biology, Institute of Biomedical and 
Life Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow, United Kingdom.
Comment in
    PLoS Biol.
2006 Aug;4(8):e270.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040270.
Several studies have demonstrated that poor early nutrition, followed by growth 
compensation, can have negative consequences later in life.
However, it remains 
unclear whether this is attributable to the nutritional deficit itself or a cost 
of compensatory growth.
This distinction is important to our understanding both 
of the proximate and ultimate factors that shape growth trajectories and of how 
best to manage growth in our own and other species following low birth weight.
We reared sibling pairs of zebra finches on different quality nutrition for the 
first 20 d of life only and examined their learning performance in adulthood.
Final body size was not affected.
However, the speed of learning a simple task 
in adulthood, which involved associating a screen colour with the presence of a 
food reward, was negatively related to the amount of growth compensation that 
had occurred.
Learning speed was not related to the early diet itself or the 
amount of early growth depression.
These results show that the level of 
compensatory growth that occurs following a period of poor nutrition is 
associated with long-term negative consequences for cognitive function and 
suggest that a growth-performance trade-off may determine optimal growth 
trajectories.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pbio.0040251
PMCID: PMC1502146
PMID: 16834460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Astragali Radix Extract on Carcinogenesis
 Cytokine Production, and Cytotoxicity in Mice Treated with a Carcinogen,<i>N</i>-Butyl-<i>N</i>-butanolnitrosoamine 1.
Cancer Invest.
1999;17(1):30-5. doi: 10.1080/07357909909011714.
Effects of astragali radix extract on carcinogenesis, cytokine production, and 
cytotoxicity in mice treated with a carcinogen, N-butyl-N'-butanolnitrosoamine.
Kurashige S(1), Akuzawa Y, Endo F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Sciences, Gunma University School of Health 
Sciences, Japan.
We studied the effects of astragali radix extract, a Chinese herb and one of 
eight components in Shikaron, on carcinogenesis, natural killer (NK) cell 
activity, and the cytokine production of lymphocytes in mice treated with a 
carcinogen, N-butyl-N'-butanolnitrosoamine (BBN).
We found a significantly lower 
incidence of urinary bladder carcinoma in mice treated with BBN plus 10 
mg/kg/day or more of Astragalus extract (7, 2, and 3 mice among 15 mice in 10, 
20, and 40 mg/kg/day group, respectively, vs. 14 of 15 mice treated with BBN 
alone).
Astragalus extract prevented the cytotoxic activity of lymphocytes 
against YAC-1 cells from the depression by BBN.
It also protected the production 
of interleukin-2 and gamma-interferon of lymphocytes from the depression by BBN.
These results, including our previous findings, suggest that the Astragalus 
extract exerts an anticarcinogenic effect in carcinogen-treated mice through 
activation of cytotoxic activity and the production of cytokines.
DOI: 10.1080/07357909909011714
PMID: 10999046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dose-related effects of venlafaxine on pCREB and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the hippocampus of the rat by chronic unpredictable stress <jats:sec id="S0924270800026624_sec1"><jats:title /><jats:p><jats:bold>Background:</jats:bold> The molecular pathogenesis of depression and psychopharmacology of antidepressants remain elusive. Recent hypotheses suggest that changes in neurogenesis and plasticity may underlie the aetiology of depression. The hippocampus is affected by depression and shows neuronal remodelling during adulthood.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec id="S0924270800026624_sec2"><jats:title /><jats:p><jats:bold>Objective:</jats:bold> The present study on the adult rat hippocampus
 was to evaluate the dose-related effects of chronic venlafaxine on the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and phosphorylated cyclic-AMP response element binding protein (pCREB).</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec id="S0924270800026624_sec3" sec-type="methods"><jats:title /><jats:p><jats:bold>Methods:</jats:bold> Sprague-Dawley rats were exposed to a variety of chronic unpredictable stressors (CUSs) to establish a depression model.
Rats were treated for either 14 or 28 days with venlafaxine (5 and 10 mg/kg, respectively).
The hippocampal expression of pCREB and BDNF mRNA and protein was assessed by using immunohistochemistry, western blotting and reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR).</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec id="S0924270800026624_sec4" sec-type="results"><jats:title /><jats:p><jats:bold>Results:</jats:bold> Rats subjected to CUS procedure consumed less sucrose solution compared with non-stressed rats.
The CUS influenced exploratory activity resulting in a reduction of the motility counts.
Chronic low dose (5 mg/kg, 14 and 28 days), but not high dose (10 mg/kg, 14 and 28 days) of venlafaxine treatment increased the expression of pCREB and BDNF mRNA and protein in the CUS rat hippocampus.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec id="S0924270800026624_sec5" sec-type="conclusion"><jats:title /><jats:p><jats:bold>Conclusion:</jats:bold> Neuronal plasticity-associated proteins such as pCREB and BDNF play an important role both in stress-related depression and in antidepressant effect.</jats:p></jats:sec>
The immune response to allogeneic rat platelets; Ag‐B antigens in matrix form lacking la <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Allogeneic rat platelets fail to induce either primary antibody or cell‐mediated immune responses despite repeated injections. Platelets bear Ag‐B epitopes which are capable of being recognized by antigen‐reactive T and B cells since primed rats develop secondary responses after challenge with allogeneic platelets. The secondary responses induced decrease rather than increase on repeated injection of platelets. Repeated injection of allogeneic platelets into nonprimed rats leads to a state of specific
 partial non‐reactivity; recipients given such treatment show marked depression of cytotoxic antibody responses, but normal cellular immunity after challenge with viable lymphoid cells taken from the platelet‐donor strain.
Injection of normal rats with allogeneic platelets mixed with 3rd party, viable lymphoid cells, does not provoke an anti‐platelet Ag‐B antibody response.</jats:p>
Fetal oxygen consumption
 umbilical circulation and electrocortical activity transitions in fetal lambs.
1.
J Dev Physiol.
1984 Jun;6(3):267-74.
Fetal oxygen consumption, umbilical circulation and electrocortical activity 
transitions in fetal lambs.
Walker AM, Fleming J, Smolich J, Stunden R, Horne R, Maloney J.

Chronically instrumented fetal lambs were employed to test the hypothesis that 
the high voltage electrocortical activity phase is a state of low fetal oxygen 
consumption compared with the low voltage electrocortical activity phase.
Measurements of umbilical flow (electromagnetic flowmeter) together with oxygen 
saturations and haemoglobin concentration of umbilical venous and arterial blood 
were used to calculate oxygen consumption.
Significant depression of umbilical 
flow occurred at the transition from low voltage electrocortical activity to 
high voltage electrocortical activity; the maximum change averaged 14% 2 min 
after the onset of the high voltage phase.
Significant depressions of oxygen 
saturation in umbilical venous and arterial blood were found within 5 min of the 
onset of high voltage electrocortical activity, averaging 2.2% and 5.2% 
respectively.
No depression of oxygen consumption was found during these 
transient changes in early high voltage electrocortical activity, as the 
venous-arterial oxygen content difference widened significantly as a consequence 
of a greater fall in umbilical arterial oxygen content (0.7 ml/dl) than in 
umbilical venous oxygen content (0.3 ml/dl).
Overall, we detected no significant 
depression of oxygen consumption in high voltage electrocortical activity.
However a small but significant depression of oxygen consumption (6%) was found 
late in the high voltage electrocortical activity phase when the level of oxygen 
consumption in low voltage electrocortical activity was greater than 7 ml/min 
per kg.
We conclude that the high voltage electrocortical activity in fetal 
lambs is not associated with a marked depression of oxygen consumption, despite 
significant transient depressions of umbilical flow and oxygen levels in 
umbilical venous and arterial blood.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 6747228 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Gluconeogenesis from L-serine in rat liver 1. Life Sci. 1975 Jul 15;17(2):267-73. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(75)90514-7.

Gluconeogenesis from L-serine in rat liver.

Bhatia SC
 Bhatia S, Rous S.

DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(75)90514-7
PMID: 1160499 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The serine hydrolase ABHD6 controls the accumulation and efficacy of 2-AG at cannabinoid receptors 1. Nat Neurosci. 2010 Aug;13(8):951-7. doi: 10.1038/nn.2601. Epub 2010 Jul 25.

The serine hydrolase ABHD6 controls the accumulation and efficacy of 2-AG at 
cannabinoid receptors.

Marrs WR(1)
 Blankman JL, Horne EA, Thomazeau A, Lin YH, Coy J, Bodor AL, 
Muccioli GG, Hu SS, Woodruff G, Fung S, Lafourcade M, Alexander JP, Long JZ, Li 
W, Xu C, Möller T, Mackie K, Manzoni OJ, Cravatt BF, Stella N.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiology and Behavior Graduate Program, University of Washington, 
Seattle, Washington, USA.
The endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) regulates neurotransmission 
and neuroinflammation by activating CB1 cannabinoid receptors on neurons and CB2 
cannabinoid receptors on microglia.
Enzymes that hydrolyze 2-AG, such as 
monoacylglycerol lipase, regulate the accumulation and efficacy of 2-AG at 
cannabinoid receptors.
We found that the recently described serine hydrolase 
alpha-beta-hydrolase domain 6 (ABHD6) also controls the accumulation and 
efficacy of 2-AG at cannabinoid receptors.
In cells from the BV-2 microglia cell 
line, ABHD6 knockdown reduced hydrolysis of 2-AG and increased the efficacy with 
which 2-AG can stimulate CB2-mediated cell migration.
ABHD6 was expressed by 
neurons in primary culture and its inhibition led to activity-dependent 
accumulation of 2-AG.
In adult mouse cortex, ABHD6 was located postsynaptically 
and its selective inhibition allowed the induction of CB1-dependent long-term 
depression by otherwise subthreshold stimulation.
Our results indicate that 
ABHD6 is a rate-limiting step of 2-AG signaling and is therefore a bona fide 
member of the endocannabinoid signaling system.
DOI: 10.1038/nn.2601
PMCID: PMC2970523
PMID: 20657592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Spontaneous Cortical Spreading Depression and Intracranial Pressure Following Acute Subdural Hematoma in a Rat 1. Acta Neurochir Suppl. 2012;114:373-6. doi: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0956-4_72.

Spontaneous cortical spreading depression and intracranial pressure following 
acute subdural hematoma in a rat.

Alessandri B(1)
 Tretzel JS, Heimann A, Kempski O.
Author information:
(1)University Medicine of the Johannes Gutenberg-University, Mainz, Germany.
beat.alessandri@unimedizin-mainz.de

Acute subdural hemorrhage (ASDH) is a frequent and devastating consequence of 
traumatic brain injury.
Tissue damage develops rapidly and makes treatment even 
more difficult.
Management of increased intracranial pressure (ICP) due to 
extravasated blood volume and brain swelling is often insufficient to control 
all adverse effects of ASDH.
In addition to sheer volume, spontaneously 
triggered cortical spreading depression (CSD) that leads to cell death following 
ischemia or trauma may contribute to injury development after ASDH.
Therefore, 
we explored the occurrence of CSD by tissue impedance (IMP) measurement in a rat 
model subjected to ASDH.
IMP and intraventricular and mean arterial pressure 
were monitored before (baseline), during (blood infusion), and after ASDH for 3 
h.Tissue impedance increased by around 203% of baseline during subdural infusion 
of 300 μl of autologous, venous blood and dropped back to baseline within 22 
min.
Fifty-six minutes after the start of ASDH a cluster of four short-lasting 
(3-3.5 min; 140-160% of baseline) IMP increases started that reflected 
spontaneous CSDs.
This pattern presumes that CSD occurs early after ASDH and 
therefore may contribute to the rapid lesion development in this disease.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-7091-0956-4_72
PMID: 22327726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Estradiol modulates anhedonia and behavioral despair in rats and negative affect in a subgroup of women at high risk for postpartum depression 1. Physiol Behav. 2013 Jul 2;119:137-44. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2013.06.009. Epub
 2013 Jun 13.

Estradiol modulates anhedonia and behavioral despair in rats and negative affect 
in a subgroup of women at high risk for postpartum depression.

Schiller CE(1)
 O'Hara MW, Rubinow DR, Johnson AK.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 10514 
Neurosciences Hospital, 101 Manning Drive, Campus Box 7160, Chapel Hill, NC 
27599-7160, USA.
crystal_schiller@med.unc.edu

In an effort to address inconsistencies in the literature, we tested a 
cross-species estrogen withdrawal model of postpartum depression (PPD) with a 
series of rodent experiments and a prospective, naturalistic human study.
All 
rats were ovariectomized prior to experimentation.
The first rat experiment 
examined the effects of low- and high-dose estradiol administration and 
withdrawal on lateral-hypothalamic self-stimulation, a behavioral index of 
anhedonia, in experimental (n=7) and vehicle-only control animals (n=7).
The 
second rat experiment examined the effects of high-dose estradiol withdrawal on 
activity and immobility during the forced swim test, an index of behavioral 
despair, in a separate group of experimental (n=8) and vehicle-only control 
animals (n=8).
In the human study, women with (n=8) and without (n=12) a history 
of PPD completed mood ratings and collected saliva samples (to assess estradiol 
levels) daily during the third trimester of pregnancy through 10 days 
postpartum.
The presence of PPD was assessed at one month postpartum.
In the 
animal studies, rats in the estradiol withdrawal group demonstrated 
significantly greater immobility and less swimming than controls.
Estradiol 
withdrawal resulted in reduced responding for electrical stimulation (multiple 
intensities) relative to estradiol administration.
In the human study, there was 
no significant association between estradiol and negative affect among women 
with or without a history of PPD.
However, there was a correlation between daily 
estradiol levels and negative affect in the women with incident PPD at one month 
postpartum.
Despite important cross-species differences, both the rat and human 
studies provided evidence of the effects of estradiol on perinatal depressive 
symptoms.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2013.06.009
PMCID: PMC3772627
PMID: 23770328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: None of the authors report any potential 
conflicts of interest relevant to the information contained within this 
manuscript.
The role of biotransformation in anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity in mice. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1993 Sep;266(3):1312-20.

The role of biotransformation in anthracycline-induced cardiotoxicity in mice.

de Jong J(1)
 Schoofs PR, Snabilié AM, Bast A, van der Vijgh WJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacochemistry, Faculty of Chemistry, Vrije Universiteit, 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
Anthracyclines are highly efficacious antineoplastic agents but they become 
cardiotoxic after repeated dosing.
For the major anthracycline, doxorubicin 
(Dox), this toxicity is thought to be associated with the formation of the 
13-dihydro metabolite.
Paced mouse left atria were used to assess the 
cardiotoxicity of Dox, 4'-epidoxorubicin (Epi), daunorubicin (Dauno) and their 
major metabolites.
Apart from the aglycons, all compounds (1-500 microM) reduced 
the contractile force.
To correct for differences in cellular uptake, 
anthracycline concentrations were determined in the atria after 1 h of 
incubation.
IC50 values ranged from 0.33 mumol/g for 13-dihydro-Dox to 3.5 
mumol/g for Dauno.
The toxicities relative to Dox, i.e., the ratio of 
IC50,Dox/IC50,anthracycline, ranged from 0.19 for Dauno to 2.1 for 
13-dihydro-Dox (the most toxic).
For Dox, Epi and Dauno, the 13-dihydro 
metabolite had greater toxicity than the corresponding parent compound.
The 
pharmacokinetics of Dox and Epi in the murine heart are comparable and, thus, 
cannot explain the reduced cardiotoxicity of Epi.
However, when pharmacokinetic 
data of Dox and Epi in murine heart tissue were interpreted using the relative 
toxicity factors, Epi would be expected to be threefold less cardiotoxic than 
Dox, thus providing a better correlation with in vivo data.
This simple 
pharmacological model in combination with preclinical pharmacokinetics may 
contribute to the prediction of the cardiotoxic potency of new anthracyclines 
relative to Dox.
PMID: 8371139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mediation of Sarcoplasmic Reticulum Disruption in the Ischemic Myocardium: Proposed Mechanism by the Interaction of Hydrogen Ions and Oxygen Free Radicals 1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1983;161:377-89. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4684-4472-8_21.

Mediation of sarcoplasmic reticulum disruption in the ischemic myocardium: 
proposed mechanism by the interaction of hydrogen ions and oxygen free radicals.

Hess ML
 Krause S, Kontos HA.
Acute myocardial ischemia results in a decrease in developed tension and an 
increase in resting tension.
A breakdown of the excitation-contraction coupling 
system can explain the behavior of the ischemic muscle at a subcellular level.
We have identified a specific defect in the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) from the 
ischemic myocardium; i.e., the uncoupling of calcium transport from ATP 
hydrolysis.
The mediators of this excitation-contraction uncoupling process have 
not been identified.
It is now established that the intracellular pH of the 
ischemic myocardium is in the range of 6.4 but the role of protons and potential 
role of free radicals have not been identified.
We have hypothesized that 
protons and free radicals may interact to produce the excitation-contraction 
uncoupling of the ischemic myocardium.
Cardiac SR was isolated from the wall of 
canine left ventricle and calcium uptake velocity and Ca2+ stimulated-Mg2+ 
dependent ATPase activity determined.
Increasing proton concentration between pH 
7.0 and 6.4 significantly reduced calcium uptake rates (pH 7.0 = 0.95 +/- 0.02; 
6.4 = 0.50 +/- 0.02 mumoles Ca2+/mg-min; p less than 0.01) with no effect on 
ATPase activity.
Calculated coupling ratios (mumoles Ca2+/mumoles Pi) decreased 
from 0.87 +/- 0.06 at pH 7.0 to 0.51 +/- 0.05 at pH 6.4.
At pH 7.0, the 
generation of exogenous free radicals from the xanthine-xanthine oxidase system 
significantly depressed both calcium uptake rates (Control = 0.95 +/- 0.02; X+XO 
= 0.15 +/- 0.02) and ATPase activity (Control = 1.05 +/- 0.02; X+XO + 0.30 +/- 
0.01 mumoles Pi/mg-min; p less than 0.01).
The decreases in calcium uptake and 
in ATPase activity were completely reversible with superoxide dismutase (SOD).
At pH 6.4 in the presence of xanthine and xanthine oxidase, there is a further 
depression of calcium uptake rates (Control = 0.50 +/- 0.02; X+XO = 0.11 +/- 
0.01; p less than 0.05) but there is no SOD reversible component.
The addition 
of SOD + 20mM mannitol normalized calcium transport at pH 6.4.
The calculated 
coupling ratio at pH 6.4 in the presence of free radicals was 0.13.
In contrast 
sarcoplasmic reticulum isolated from ischemic myocardium demonstrated a 
significant depression of calcium uptake rates at pH 7.1 which was further 
accentuated at pH 6.4.
Ca2+-ATPase was significantly depressed at pH 7.1 but 
there was no accentuation at pH 6.4.
It is concluded that no single species of 
free radical can explain the intracellular excitation-contraction uncoupling of 
the ischemic myocardium.
The system can be explained by the interaction of 
hydrogen ions and superoxide anions producing both injury to the sarcoplasmic 
reticulum and the formation of lipid free radicals with hydroxyl-like activity.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4684-4472-8_21
PMID: 6307008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Immune response to pulmonary injection of Pasteurella haemolytica-impregnated agar beads followed by transthoracic challenge exposure in goats. 1. Am J Vet Res. 1990 Oct;51(10):1629-34.

Immune response to pulmonary injection of Pasteurella haemolytica-impregnated 
agar beads followed by transthoracic challenge exposure in goats.

Purdy CW(1)
 Straus DC, Livingston CW Jr, Foster GS.
Author information:
(1)USDA-ARS, Conservation and Production Research Laboratory, Bushland, TX 
79012.
A method of inducing Pasteurella haemolytica serotype 1 (Ph1) lung infection in 
goats, using low numbers of bacteria and without impairing host immunity, was 
developed.
Two trials were conducted.
Results of trial 1, using 10 principals 
(Ph1 agar beads) and 6 controls (agar beads alone), indicated that Ph1 organisms 
imbedded in agar beads could survive host lung defenses for 32 days.
Results of 
trial 2 indicated that lung immunity in the inoculated goats (principals) was 
high and they were more protected than controls against a transthoracic 
challenge of Ph1 (1.18 x 10(7) colony-forming units) injected into a lung of 
each goat on posttreatment day 35.
When comparing challenge-exposed principals 
with controls, the controls developed rectal temperatures above normal for a 
longer time, duration of anorexia was longer, and signs of depression were seen.
The controls developed large areas of consolidated lung tissue, more Ph1 
isolates were recovered from nasal turbinates and lung tissue, and higher Ph1 
concentrations were found in the lungs.
The serum Ph1 indirect hemagglutination 
antibody titers in the principals of both trials increased, compared with titers 
in controls.
Principal goats in trial 2 had higher Ph1 indirect hemagglutination 
antibody titers after injection of Ph1-impregnated agar beads and less severe 
lung lesions after challenge exposure than did controls.
The small pneumonic 
consolidated lesions in the principals, compared with extensive lesions in 
controls after Ph1 challenge exposure, indicated a high degree of immunity after 
exposure to Ph1 organisms imbedded in agar beads.
PMID: 2240785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Succinic dehydrogenase and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activities in brain of mice after administration of Salmonella typhi endotoxin. 1. Indian J Med Res. 1976 Jan;64(1):9-16.

Succinic dehydrogenase and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase activities in brain 
of mice after administration of Salmonella typhi endotoxin.

Nag AK
 Saha K, Mehrotra AN, Ray D.

PMID: 1270104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Carnitine on Uptake
 Oxidation and Esterification of Palmitate by the Perfused Rat Heart 1.
Proc Soc Exp Biol Med.
1970 Mar;133(3):973-7. doi: 10.3181/00379727-133-34607.
Effect of carnitine on uptake, oxidation and esterification of palmitate by the 
perfused rat heart.
Rodis SL, D'Amato PH, Koch E, Vahouny GV.
DOI: 10.3181/00379727-133-34607
PMID: 5435592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Minocycline Attenuates Depressive‐Like Behaviour Induced by Rat Model of Testicular Torsion: Involvement of Nitric Oxide Pathway <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Testicular torsion/detorsion (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>/<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">D</jats:styled-content>) can induce depression in pre‐ and post‐pubertal patients. This study was conducted to investigate the psychological impact of testicular torsion and mechanism underlying its depressive‐like behaviour
 as well as antidepressant‐like activity of minocycline and possible involvement of nitric oxide (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NO</jats:styled-content>)/cyclic <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">GMP</jats:styled-content> pathway in this paradigm in male rats undergoing testicular <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>/<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">D</jats:styled-content>.
Unilateral <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>/<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">D</jats:styled-content> was performed in 36 male adult <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">W</jats:styled-content>istar rats, and different doses of minocycline were injected alone or combined with <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sup>ω</jats:sup>‐nitro‐<jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐arginine methyl ester (<jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NAME</jats:styled-content>), non‐specific <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NO</jats:styled-content> synthase (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NOS</jats:styled-content>) inhibitor; aminoguanidine (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AG</jats:styled-content>), specific inducible <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NOS</jats:styled-content> inhibitor; <jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐arginine, an <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NO</jats:styled-content> precursor; and selective <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PDE</jats:styled-content>5<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">I</jats:styled-content>, sildenafil.
After assessment of locomotor activity in open‐field test, immobility times were recorded in the forced swimming test (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FST</jats:styled-content>).
Moreover, 30 days after testicular <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>/<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">D</jats:styled-content>, testicular venous testosterone and serum nitrite concentrations were measured.
A correlation was observed between either a decrease in plasma testosterone or an increase in serum nitrite concentrations with prolongation in immobility time in the testicular <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>/<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">D</jats:styled-content>‐operated rats <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FST</jats:styled-content>.
Minocycline (160 mg/kg) exerted the highest significant antidepressant‐like effect in the operated rats in the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">FST</jats:styled-content> (<jats:italic>p</jats:italic> &lt; 0.001).
Furthermore, combination of subeffective doses of minocycline (80 mg/kg) and either <jats:sc>l</jats:sc>‐<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NAME</jats:styled-content> (10 mg/kg) or <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">AG</jats:styled-content> (50 mg/kg) demonstrated a significant robust antidepressant‐like activity in <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>/<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">D</jats:styled-content> group (<jats:italic>p</jats:italic> &lt; 0.01).
Consequently, <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NO</jats:styled-content>/c<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">GMP</jats:styled-content> pathway was involved in testicular <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>/<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">D</jats:styled-content>‐induced depressive‐like behaviour and antidepressant‐like activity of minocycline in the animal model.
Moreover, a contribution was observed between either decreased testosterone or elevated serum nitrite levels and depressive‐like behaviour following testicular <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>/<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">D</jats:styled-content>.</jats:p>
In vivo inhibition of R-factor transfer by clindamycin and its analogues 1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1977 Nov;3 Suppl C:53-8. doi:
10.1093/jac/3.suppl_c.53.

In vivo inhibition of R-factor transfer by clindamycin and its analogues.

Coats JH
 Roeser J.

DOI: 10.1093/jac/3.suppl_c.53
PMID: 340446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Comparative activity of different analeptics against morphine-induced respiratory depression in rabbits]. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1955 Oct 1;103(2-3):146-59.

[Comparative activity of different analeptics against morphine-induced 
respiratory depression in rabbits].

[Article in French]

BARGETON D
 KRUMM-HELLER C, EON M.

PMID: 13259727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Analysis of bathmotropic effect of diprazin and dimedrol]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1970 Jan-Feb;33(1):35-7.

[Analysis of bathmotropic effect of diprazin and dimedrol].

[Article in Russian]

Gubarev EA
 Buttseva TA.
PMID: 5425612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mode of action of the antitumor compound bruceantin
 an inhibitor of protein synthesis.
1.
Mol Pharmacol.
1976 Jan;12(1):167-76.
Mode of action of the antitumor compound bruceantin, an inhibitor of protein 
synthesis.
Liao LL, Kupchan SM, Horwitz SB.
PMID: 1256442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of hydroalcoholic extract of Sphaeranthus indicus against experimentally induced anxiety
 depression and convulsions in rodents 1.
Int J Ayurveda Res.
2010 Apr;1(2):87-92. doi: 10.4103/0974-7788.64412.
Effect of hydroalcoholic extract of Sphaeranthus indicus against experimentally 
induced anxiety, depression and convulsions in rodents.
Galani VJ(1), Patel BG.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, A. R. College of Pharmacy and G. H. Patel 
Institute of Pharmacy, Vallabh Vidyanagar - 388120, Gujarat, India.
To investigate the effects of a hydroalcoholic extract of the Sphaeranthus 
indicus (SIE) against experimentally induced anxiety, depression and convulsions 
in rodents.
The SIE (100, 200, 500 mg/kg, p.o.)
was used in elevated plus maze, 
open field, forced swimming, and tail suspension tests in mice.
The same doses 
were also used to evaluate its anticonvulsant effect on pentylenetetrazole 
(PTZ)-induced convulsions in mice and maximal electroshock (MES)-induced 
convulsions in rats.
SIE was found to increase the number of entries and the 
time spent in the open arms of the maze at a dose of 100 mg/kg, p.o., indicating 
its anxiolytic activity.
On the other hand, higher doses of SIE (200 and 500 
mg/kg, p.o.)
decreased open arm entries and time spent in the open arms of the 
maze in the elevated plus maze test indicating an absence of anxiolytic 
activity.
However, this effect could have been related to a decrease in the 
locomotor activity of the mice and not to an anxiogenic effect, as indicated by 
the reduction in the total number of entries in the elevated plus maze.
SIE also 
(at doses of 200 and 500 mg/kg, p.o.)
decreased locomotor activity but did not 
affect emotional activity parameters in the open field test, suggesting a 
possible central nervous depressant activity.
SIE also increased the immobility 
time in the forced swimming test at an oral dose of 500 mg/kg but did not 
significantly modify the activity in the tail suspension test.
SIE protected 
rats against MES-induced convulsions and mice against PTZ-induced convulsions.
Sphaeranthus indicus demonstrated anxiolytic, central nervous depressant, and 
anticonvulsant activities in rodents, thus supporting the folk medicinal use of 
this plant in nervous disorders.
DOI: 10.4103/0974-7788.64412
PMCID: PMC2924989
PMID: 20814521

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.
REPRODUCTIVE AND DEVELOPMENTAL TOXICITY STUDIES OF CALCIPOTRIOL (MC903):(1) : A Fertility Study in Rats by Subcutaneous Administration 1. J Toxicol Sci. 1996 Jul;21 Suppl 2:389-401. doi: 
10.2131/jts.21.supplementii_389.

[Reproductive and developmental toxicity studies of calcipotriol (MC903): (1)--A 
fertility study in rats by subcutaneous administration].

[Article in Japanese]

Suzuki T(1)
 Uchiyama H, Koike Y, Ono M, Shirakawa K, Nagata M, Konishi R.

Author information:
(1)Japan Seigiken Research Center Co., Ltd., Shizuoka, Japan.
Calcipotriol (MC903), an anti-psoriasic agent, was given subcutaneously at dose 
levels of 1, 5 and 25 micrograms/kg/day during the pre-pairing period (9 weeks 
prior to pairing in males and 2 weeks prior to pairing in females) and the 
pairing period to male and female rats and in the early stage of pregnancy (day 
0 through 7 of gestation) to female rats, and the effects of the test compound 
on male and female reproductive performance and fetal development were 
evaluated.
1.
In the male 25 micrograms/kg group, opacity of the eyeball surface 
was observed, and depression of body weight gain, and decreases of body weight 
and food consumption, and increases in the weight of the kidney were 
statistically significant in comparison with vehicle controls.
2.
In the female 
25 micrograms/kg group, depression of body weight gain and food consumption were 
statistically significant in comparison with vehicle controls.
3.
No changes in 
parameters of reproductive performance were seen in any dosed groups.
4.
No 
changes in parameters of implantation performance were seen.
There were no 
treated-related abnormalities in fetal mortality, weights of fetuses, and 
external, visceral and skeletal examinations.
Based on there results, it is 
considered that in the present study the no-toxic dose levels of MC903 were 5 
micrograms/kg/day for parents, 25 micrograms/kg/day for reproductive performance 
and fetal development.
DOI: 10.2131/jts.21.supplementii_389
PMID: 8741421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Jumping mechanisms in dictyopharid planthoppers (<i>Hemiptera
 Dicytyopharidae</i>) <jats:title>Summary</jats:title><jats:p>The jumping performance of four species of hemipteran bugs belonging to the family Dictyopharidae, from Europe, South Africa and Australia were analysed from high speed images.
The body shape in all was characterised by an elongated and tapering head that gave a streamlined appearance.
The body size ranged from 6-9 mm in length and 6-23 mg in mass.
The hind legs were 80-90 % of body length and 30-50% longer than the front legs, except in one species in which the front legs were particularly large so that all the legs were of similar lengths.
Jumping was propelled by rapid and simultaneous depression of the trochantera of both hind legs, powered by large muscles in the thorax and was accompanied by extension of the tibiae.
In the best jumps, defined as those with the fastest take-off velocity, Engela accelerated in 1.2 ms to a take-off velocity of 5.8 m s-1 which is the fastest achieved by any insect so far described.
During such a jump, Engela experienced an acceleration of 4830 m s-2 or 490 g while other species in the same family experienced 225 - 375 g. The best jumps in all species required an energy expenditure of 76 - 225 μJ, a power output of 12 - 80 mW and exerted a force of 12 - 29 mN.
The required power output per mass of jumping muscle ranged from 28000 - 140200 W kg-1 muscle and thus greatly exceeded the maximum active contractile limit of normal muscle.
To achieve such a jumping performance, these insects must be using a power amplification mechanism in a catapult-like action.
It is suggested that their streamlined body shape improves jumping performance by reducing drag, which for a small insect, can substantially affect forward momentum.</jats:p>
Effect of chronic chromium picolinate in animal models of anxiety and memory <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Diabetes mellitus is associated with certain neurological problems such as depression
 anxiety, memory impairment, etc.
As chromium picolinate (CrP), a widely used trace element is shown to have beneficial effects in diabetes and depression, we investigated its effects on elevated plus maze and spontaneous alternation behavior paradigm as a measure of anxiety and memory, respectively.
CrP (8 <jats:italic>μ</jats:italic>g/mL in drinking water) significantly increased percentage preference to open arm in elevated plus maze in diabetic and normal rats.
However, no significant changes were observed in percentage alternation after CrP chronic treatment.
The possible anxiolytic effect of CrP might be related to its effect on serotonergic transmission.</jats:p>
Effects of α- and β-tigogenin cellobiosides on cholesterol absorption 1. Steroids. 1986 Sep-Oct;48(3-4):197-211. doi: 10.1016/0039-128x(86)90003-6.

Effects of alpha- and beta-tigogenin cellobiosides on cholesterol absorption.

Malinow MR(1)
 Gardner JO, Nelson JT, McLaughlin P, Upson B, Aigner-Held R.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cardiovascular Diseases, Oregon Regional Primate Research 
Center, Beaverton 97006.
We have synthesized alpha- and beta-anomers of tigogenin cellobioside and have 
determined their effects on intestinal absorption of [1,2-3H]cholesterol in 
rats.
We demonstrated that the loss of tritium label likely to occur in the 
conversion of cholesterol to coprostanone was minimal.
Dose response studies 
showed that both anomers depressed intestinal absorption of cholesterol but the 
depression was greater with the beta-anomer.
DOI: 10.1016/0039-128x(86)90003-6
PMID: 3445279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Persistence of PAD and presynaptic inhibition of muscle spindle afferents after peripheral nerve crush 1. Brain Res. 2004 Nov 19;1027(1-2):179-87. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.08.058.

Persistence of PAD and presynaptic inhibition of muscle spindle afferents after 
peripheral nerve crush.

Enríquez-Denton M(1)
 Manjarrez E, Rudomin P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Biophysics and Neurosciences, Centro de 
Investigación y Estudios Avanzados, Av.
Instituto Politécnico Nacional 2508, 
México DF, Mexico.
Two to twelve weeks after crushing a muscle nerve, still before the damaged 
afferents reinnervate the muscle receptors, conditioning stimulation of group I 
fibers from flexor muscles depolarizes the damaged afferents [M. Enriquez, I. 
Jimenez, P. Rudomin, Changes in PAD patterns of group I muscle afferents after a 
peripheral nerve crush.
Exp.
Brain Res., 107 (1996), 405-420].
It is not known, 
however, if this primary afferent depolarization (PAD) is indeed related to 
presynaptic inhibition.
We now show in the cat that 2-12 weeks after crushing 
the medial gastrocnemius nerve (MG), conditioning stimulation of group I fibers 
from flexors increases the excitability of the intraspinal terminals of both the 
intact lateral gastrocnemius plus soleus (LGS) and of the previously damaged MG 
fibers ending in the motor pool, because of PAD.
The PAD is associated with the 
depression of the pre- and postsynaptic components of the extracellular field 
potentials (EFPs) evoked in the motor pool by stimulation of either the intact 
LGS or of the previously damaged MG nerves.
These observations indicate, in 
contrast to what has been reported for crushed cutaneous afferents [K.W.
Horch, 
J.W.
Lisney, Changes in primary afferent depolarization of sensory neurones 
during peripheral nerve regeneration in the cat, J.
Physiol., 313 (1981), 
287-299], that shortly after damaging their peripheral axons, the synaptic 
efficacy of group I spindle afferents remains under central control.
Presynaptic 
inhibitory mechanisms could be utilized to adjust the central actions of muscle 
afferents not fully recovered from peripheral lesions.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.08.058
PMID: 15494169 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Kininases and vascular responses to kinins 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1982 Feb 26;78(2):167-74. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(82)90233-3.

Kininases and vascular responses to kinins.

Babiuk C
 Marceau F, St-Pierre S, Regoli D.

We have utilized several inhibitors to assess the effects of kininases on the 
contractile activity of bradykinin (BK), kallidin (KD), des-Arg9-BK and 
des-Arg10-KD on two isolated blood vessels, the rabbit aorta and mesenteric 
vein.
The response of the two vessels to kinins are mediated by B1-receptors, 
implying that fragments of kinins without the C-terminal arginine are much more 
active on these tissues than the whole kinin sequences.
Blockers of 
carboxypeptidase B-like enzymes, such as SQ24798 and pivalyl-L-arginine decrease 
the apparent affinity of BK and KD on the two vessels, while not changing those 
of des-Arg9-BK and des-Arg10-KD; this suggests that a major part of the 
contractile activities of BK and KD are mediated by des-Arg metabolites formed 
in situ at the tissue level by a kininase I.
The block of kininase II by 
captopril or desacetylated MK-421 bring about a complex pattern of activity 
changes that include the potentiation of BK and KD and the depression of 
des-Arg10-KD.
These results, in conjunction with those obtained with the 
non-specific inhibitors of metallopeptidases, thioglycolic acid and EDTA, 
suggest that the relative contribution of kininase I and kininase II to the 
degradation of kinins in arterial and venous vessels may be different.
The 
implications of these findings on the pharmacology of B1-receptors are 
discussed.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(82)90233-3
PMID: 6122586 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Functional correlates for 5-HT1A receptors in maternally deprived rats displaying anxiety and depression-like behaviors 1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2009 Mar 17;33(2):262-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2008.11.017. Epub 2008 Dec 7.

Functional correlates for 5-HT(1A) receptors in maternally deprived rats 
displaying anxiety and depression-like behaviors.

Lambás-Señas L(1)
 Mnie-Filali O, Certin V, Faure C, Lemoine L, Zimmer L, 
Haddjeri N.

Author information:
(1)Université de Lyon, F-69008, Lyon, France.
laura.lambas-senas@recherche.univ-lyon1.fr

Maternal separation is known to induce long-term changes in neuroendocrine and 
emotional responsiveness to stress in a large variety of models.
We examined an 
animal model of early deprivation in Sprague-Dawley rats consisting of 
separating litters from their mothers and littermates 3 h daily during postnatal 
days 2 to 15.
In adulthood, maternally deprived rats in comparison with 
non-deprived controls exhibited an increase in anxiety and depression-related 
behaviors in the open-field and forced swim tests.
Because serotonin (5-HT) 
5-HT(1A) receptors seem to play an important role in the pathophysiology of 
major depression and in the mechanism of action of antidepressants, we 
investigated if 5-HT(1A) receptor function is altered in deprived rats.
Although 
the hypothermic response to the 5-HT(1A) receptor agonist 8-OH-DPAT was 
increased in adult deprived rats compared to non-deprived control group, no 
differences between groups were found in the effect of the systemic 8-OH-DPAT 
administration on serotoninergic cell firing in dorsal raphe nucleus and in the 
5-HT release at the ventral hippocampus levels.
These results suggest that 
5-HT(1A) receptors are not substantially affected in adult Sprague-Dawley rats 
that were subjected to a maternal deprivation 3 h daily during the neonatal 
period.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2008.11.017
PMID: 19111592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Lewis Wolpert discusses development and depression 1. Drug Discov Today. 2004 Jun 1;9(11):471-2. doi: 10.1016/S1359-6446(04)03106-X.

Lewis Wolpert discusses development and depression. Interview by Joanne Clough.

Wolpert L.

Lewis Wolpert is Professor of Biology as Applied to Medicine in the Department 
of Anatomy and Developmental Biology at University College
 London, UK.
His 
research interests focus on the mechanisms that are involved in embryonic 
development.
Lewis originally trained as a civil engineer in South Africa but in 
1955 made the move to research in cellular biology at King's College, London.
He 
was made a Fellow of the Royal Society in 1980 and awarded the CBE in 1990.
Lewis was also made a Fellow of the Royal Society of Literature in 1999 and has 
presented science on both radio and TV for several years.
He was awarded The 
Royal Society Michael Faraday Prize in 2000 for his contribution to the public 
understanding of science, most notably through his Chairmanship of the Committee 
for the Public Understanding of Science (COPUS; 1993-1998).
He is the author of 
numerous books, including Malignant Sadness: The Anatomy of Depression, 
Principles of Development, The Unnatural Nature of Science and The Triumph of 
the Embryo.
He also writes a regular column for The Independent.
DOI: 10.1016/S1359-6446(04)03106-X
PMID: 15149619 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sinusoidal cells in rats with portacaval shunt: a morphometric study. 1. J Submicrosc Cytol. 1982 Jul;14(3):453-60.

Sinusoidal cells in rats with portacaval shunt: a morphometric study.

Dubuisson L
 Bioulac-Sage P, Bedin C, Balabaud C.

Sinusoidal cells were studied in rats 2 weeks after portacaval shunt.
Livers 
were perfused with glutaraldehyde via the aorta.
Morphometric analysis was 
performed in periportal and centrolobular zones of the liver acinus.
Liver 
atrophy was the main consequence of portal blood derivation.
Per unit of hepatic 
parenchyma the number of hepatocytes and Kuppfer cells counted on 1 micron 
section was comparable in portacaval shunt and sham operated rats.
2 weeks after 
the shunt, sinusoidal cell ultrastructure was nearly normal.
Morphometric 
analysis showed sinusoids slightly enlarged and Kupffer cell volume density 
increased in both zones.
Kupffer cell lysosomal-like structures such as 
electron-lucent vacuoles and phagolysosomes had larger volume density.
Ito cells 
number and volume density slightly increased after portacaval shunt.
These 
findings suggest that endotoxemia which could occur after portal blood shunting 
might be better related to shunting than to depression of the 
reticuloendothelial system.
PMID: 7175982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression of Release by mGluR8 Alters Ca2+ Dependence of Release Machinery 1. Cereb Cortex. 2012 Jul;22(7):1498-509. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhr217. Epub 2011
Sep  7.

Depression of release by mGluR8 alters Ca2+ dependence of release machinery.

Erdmann E(1)
 Rupprecht V, Matthews E, Kukley M, Schoch S, Dietrich D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, University Clinic Bonn, D-53105 Bonn, Germany.
The ubiquitous presynaptic metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs) are 
generally believed to primarily inhibit synaptic transmission through blockade 
of Ca(2+) entry.
Here, we analyzed how mGluR8 achieves a nearly complete 
inhibition of glutamate release at hippocampal synapses.
Surprisingly, 
presynaptic Ca(2+) imaging and miniature excitatory postsynaptic current 
recordings showed that mGluR8 acts without affecting Ca(2+) entry, diffusion, 
and buffering.
We quantitatively compared the Ca(2+) dependence of the 
inhibition of release by mGluR8 with the inhibition by ω-conotoxin GVIA.
These 
calculations suggest that the inhibition produced by mGluR8 may be explained by 
a decrease in the apparent Ca(2+) affinity of the release sensor and, to a 
smaller extent, by a reduction of the maximal release rate.
Upon activation of 
mGluR8, phasic transmitter release toward the end of a train of action 
potentials is greater as compared with presynaptic inhibition induced by 
blocking Ca(2+) entry, which is consistent with the important role of Ca(2+) in 
accelerating the replenishment of released vesicles.
The action of mGluR8 was 
resistant to blockers of classical G-protein transduction pathways including 
inhibition of adenylate cyclase and may represent a direct effect on the release 
machinery.
In conclusion, our data identify a mode of presynaptic inhibition 
which allows mGluR8 to profoundly inhibit vesicle fusion while not diminishing 
vesicle replenishment and which thereby differentially changes the temporal 
transmission properties of the inhibited synapse.
DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhr217
PMID: 21903594 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Lengthy unilateral EEG changes in alert rabbits after a spreading single depressed wave]. 1. Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlova. 2003 Jul-Aug;53(4):437-45.

[Lengthy unilateral EEG changes in alert rabbits after a spreading single 
depressed wave].

[Article in Russian]

Koroleva VI(1)
 Davydov VI, Roshchina RIa, Sulimov AV.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Moscow.
Effects of a single wave of the cortical spreading depression (SD) on the ECoG 
of a waking rabbit was studied with chronically implanted intracortical calomel 
and silverball epidural electrodes.
DC potential shifts and integral electrical 
activity were recorded monopolary in reference to a nasal-bone electrode.
ECoG 
spectral analysis (FFT) showed that an SD wave was accompanied by a suppression 
of the neocortical activity in a broad frequency range (0.25-80 Hz).
However, 
the SD-related ECoG depression was a rather short phenomenon (5-7 min) as 
compared to a following rebound effect, i.e., persistent (1.5-2 h) unilateral 
exaltation of bioelectrical activity.
The spectral power in the delta (6-14 
fold) and beta bands (2-6-fold) increased, whereas the high-frequency activity 
(40-80 Hz) remained suppressed.
Similar changes in the contralateral neocortex 
were poorly pronounced or absent; this resulted in a strong interhemispheric 
asymmetry.
It is suggested that (1) exaltation of the delta activity after SD 
wave is related not only to a dendrite swelling and changes in the extracellular 
space structure but to increase in synaptic transmission efficiency, probably, 
by the type of anoxic potentiation, (2) activation of some subcortical 
structures by the mechanism of their release from the inhibitory neocortical 
control is an additional factor of the augmentation of the delta and 
spindle-like beta activity after an SD wave, and (3) the long-term attenuation 
of the high-frequency gamma activity is a result of its strong suppression 
during the SD and its reciprocal relations with the exalted delta activity.
PMID: 14598551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cerebrospinal Fluid Corticotropin-Releasing Factor and Perceived Early-Life Stress in Depressed Patients and Healthy Control Subjects 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2004 Apr;29(4):777-84. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300375.

Cerebrospinal fluid corticotropin-releasing factor and perceived early-life 
stress in depressed patients and healthy control subjects.

Carpenter LL(1)
 Tyrka AR, McDougle CJ, Malison RT, Owens MJ, Nemeroff CB, Price 
LH.
Author information:
(1)Mood Disorders Research Program and Laboratory for Clinical Neuroscience, 
Butler Hospital, Providence, RI 02906, USA.
Linda_Carpenter_MD@Brown.edu

Previous studies have reported elevated concentrations of cerebrospinal fluid 
(CSF) corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF) in patients with major depression.
Elevations of CSF CRF have also been reported in adult laboratory animals 
exposed to the stress of brief maternal deprivation or maternal neglect in the 
neonatal or preweaning period.
The present study was designed to determine 
whether major depression and a history of perceived early adversity in childhood 
are independently associated with elevated CSF CRF concentrations in adults.
In 
this case-control study, 27 medication-free adults with major depression and 25 
matched controls underwent standardized lumbar puncture for collection of a 
single CSF sample at 1200.
Subjects provided data about significant adverse 
early-life experiences and rated their global perceived level of stress during 
pre-school and preteen years on a six-point Likert scale.
The mean difference in 
CSF CRF between depressed patients and controls did not reach statistical 
significance.
In a regression model, perceived early-life stress was a 
significant predictor of CSF CRF, but depression was not.
Perinatal adversity 
and perceived adversity in the preteen adversity years (ages 6-13 years) were 
both independently associated with decreasing CSF CRF concentrations.
The 
relationship observed between perceived early-life stress and adult CSF CRF 
concentrations in this study closely parallels recent preclinical findings.
More 
work is needed to elucidate the critical nature and timing of early events that 
may be associated with enduring neuroendocrine changes in humans.
DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300375
PMID: 14702025 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The ontogeny of amino acid transport in rat kidney II. Kinetics of uptake and effect of anoxia 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1971 Dec 3;249(2):364-72. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2736(71)90115-5.

The ontogeny of amino acid transport in rat kidney. II. Kinetics of uptake and 
effect of anoxia.

Baerlocher KE
 Scriver CR, Mohyuddin F.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2736(71)90115-5
PMID: 5134189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Abolition of a viscerosomatic reflex during oxygen deprivation <jats:p> Effect of hypoxia was studied on the J reflex
 a term used for the reflex inhibition of muscular exercise by activation of type J pulmonary endings.
Hypoxia was induced by ventilating the animal with gas mixtures varying from 18 to 9% oxygen in nitrogen.
The blood gas tensions of the arterial blood (PaO2) were measured before, during, and after hypoxia.
It was found that the J reflex is sensitive to a reduction in oxygen.
A fall in PaO2 between 67 and 47 Torr abolished this reflex.
Studies were also undertaken to exclude the possibility that the effect of hypoxia was predominantly exerted on monosynaptic reflex itself.
A similar fall in PaO2 also depressed the monosynaptic reflex.
Minimum time required for the significant depression was 32 s. On the contrary the J reflex was abolished within this period suggesting that the abolition of J reflex is independent of the changes in monosynaptic reflex during hypoxia.
</jats:p>
Analysis of the murine 5‐HT<sub>1A</sub> receptor gene promoter <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The expression level of the 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub> receptor gene (<jats:italic>htr1a</jats:italic>) in the central nervous system (CNS) is implicated in the aetiology and treatment of anxiety disorders and depression. Previous studies of the murine <jats:italic>htr1a</jats:italic> have revealed that its proximal promoter is GC rich and TATA‐less. Several functional transcription factor binding sites
 including MAZ and SP1 recognition sequences, have been identified.
To further analyse the promoter of this receptor gene, additional upstream sequence information extending to −5.5 kb of the murine <jats:italic>htr1a</jats:italic> was generated and promoter fragments extending to −20 kb were analysed for activity in cell culture and transgenic animals.
Promoter fragments greater than 4.5 kb in length were active in 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub> receptor mRNA positive cells and inactive in 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub> receptor mRNA negative cells.
Smaller fragments were not able to confer this specificity.
In agreement, using additive transgenesis to drive <jats:italic>LacZ</jats:italic> expression <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>, CNS specific reporter gene expression was found with these longer constructs.
Transgene expression in the 4.5‐ and 20‐kb mouse lines resembled the endogenous <jats:italic>htr1a</jats:italic> expression pattern, whereas the 5.5‐kb mouse lines surprisingly revealed strongly reduced expression.
None of the three constructs was prone to confer ectopic expression, however, variation of expression between the transgenic lines was observed.
Using colocalization studies we analysed the degree of concurrence of transgenic and endogenous <jats:italic>htr1a</jats:italic> expression brought about by these three different constructs.
The highest degrees of colocalization were observed in mice harbouring the 20‐kb construct, suggesting a large promoter fragment is required to faithfully direct transgene expression in a 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub> receptor like pattern.</jats:p>
Activation of CB1 specifically located on GABAergic interneurons inhibits LTD in the lateral amygdala <jats:p>Previously
 we found that in the lateral amygdala (LA) of the mouse, WIN55,212-2 decreases both glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic transmission via activation of the cannabinoid receptor type 1 (CB1), yet produces an overall reduction of neuronal excitability.
This suggests that the effects on excitatory transmission override those on inhibitory transmission.
Here we show that CB1 activation by WIN55,212-2 and Δ<jats:sup>9</jats:sup>-THC inhibits long-term depression (LTD) of basal synaptic transmission in the LA, induced by low-frequency stimulation (LFS; 900 pulses/1 Hz).
The CB1 agonist WIN55,212-2 blocked LTD via G<jats:sub>i/o</jats:sub> proteins, activation of inwardly rectifying K<jats:sup>+</jats:sup> channels (K<jats:sub>ir</jats:sub>s), inhibition of the adenylate cyclase-protein kinase A (PKA) pathway, and PKA-dependent inhibition of voltage-gated N-type Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> channels (N-type VGCCs).
Interestingly, WIN55,212-2 effects on LTD were abolished in CB1 knock-out mice (CB1-KO), and in conditional mutants lacking CB1 expression only in GABAergic interneurons, but were still present in mutants lacking CB1 in principal forebrain neurons.
LTD induction per se was unaffected by the CB1 antagonist SR141716A and was normally expressed in CB1-KO as well as in both conditional CB1 mutants.
Our data demonstrate that activation of CB1 specifically located on GABAergic interneurons inhibits LTD in the LA.
These findings suggest that CB1 expressed on either glutamatergic or GABAergic neurons play a differential role in the control of synaptic transmission and plasticity.</jats:p>
Pulmonary arachidonic acid metabolism following acute exposures to ozone and nitrogen dioxide 1. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1990 Dec;31(4):275-90. doi:
10.1080/15287399009531456.

Pulmonary arachidonic acid metabolism following acute exposures to ozone and 
nitrogen dioxide.

Schlesinger RB(1)
 Driscoll KE, Gunnison AF, Zelikoff JT.
Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental Medicine, New York University Medical Center, NY 
10016.
Ozone (O3) and nitrogen dioxide (NO2) are common air pollutants, and exposure to 
these gases has been shown to affect pulmonary physiology, biochemistry, and 
structure.
This study examined their ability to modulate arachidonic acid 
metabolites (eicosanoids) in the lungs.
Rabbits were exposed for 2 h to O3 at 
0.1, 0.3, or 1 ppm; NO2 at 1, 3, or 10 ppm; or to a mixture of 0.3 ppm O3 and 3 
ppm NO2.
Groups of animals sacrificed either immediately or 24 h after each 
exposure underwent broncho-pulmonary lavage.
Selected eicosanoids were assessed 
in lavage fluid by radioimmunoassay.
Increases in prostaglandins E2 (PGE2) and 
F2 alpha (PGF2 alpha) were found immediately after exposure to 1 ppm O3.
Exposure to 10 ppm NO2 resulted in a depression of 6-keto-PGF1 alpha, while 
thromboxane B2 (TxB2) was elevated after exposure to 1 ppm NO2 and depressed 
following 3 and 10 ppm.
The O3/NO2 mixture resulted in synergistic increases in 
PGE2 and PGF2 alpha, with the response appearing to be driven by O3.
This study 
has demonstrated that acute exposure to either O3 or NO2 can alter pulmonary 
arachidonic acid metabolism and that the responses to these oxidants differ, 
both quantitatively and qualitatively.
DOI: 10.1080/15287399009531456
PMID: 2147723 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Inhibition of heat denaturation of albumin by a combination of coumarin and rutin derivative]. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1974 Jan;24(1):126-7.

[Inhibition of heat denaturation of albumin by a combination of coumarin and 
rutin derivative].

[Article in German]

de Ruiter N
 Stephan H.

PMID: 4406100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Warfarin and vitamin K accelerate protein and glycoprotein synthesis in isolated rat liver mitochondria in vitro 1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1970 Oct 23;41(2):498-505. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(70)90534-6.

Warfarin and vitamin K accelerate protein and glycoprotein synthesis in isolated 
rat liver mitochondria in vitro.

Bernacki RJ
 Bosmann HB.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(70)90534-6
PMID: 5518179 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Estrogen on Platelet Reactivity After Transient Forebrain Ischemia in Rats <jats:p> Estrogen’s prothrombotic effects are of increasing concern
 particularly in stroke risk and recovery.
Using an ischemic rodent model, the authors sought to determine (a) if estrogen replacement increases postischemic platelet reactivity, (b) if changes in estrogen status alter intraplatelet endothelial nitric oxide synthase (eNOS) synthesis, and (c) if estrogen-mediated effects on platelets alter cerebral blood flow during reperfusion.
Intact (I), ovariectomized (OVX), and OVX + 17 β -estradiol (E50) rats were subjected to 30 min of forebrain ischemia and 60 min of reperfusion.
Using the platelet activation marker P-selectin, postischemic platelet reactivity was quantified by flow cytometry.
In a separate cohort (I, OVX, E50), the authors quantified platelet eNOS by Western blot.
Another cohort (OVX, E50) was subjected to ischemia/reperfusion, and cerebral blood flow was determined using the iodoantipyrine technique.
Collagen-stimulated platelet P-selectin expression was increased in the OVX rats at 60 min of reperfusion, and this effect was reversed by estrogen treatment.
No differences in platelet eNOS expression were detected among groups.
Cerebral blood flow at 60 min reperfusion was comparable between the OVX and the E50 rats.
The authors conclude that during reper-fusion, estrogen deficiency increases postischemic platelet sensitivity to stimuli in estrogen-deficient rats.
Estrogen treatment mitigates effects of estrogen loss on platelets, but this early effect is apparently not caused by intraplatelet eNOS depression.
Neither estrogen deficiency nor estrogen treatment changes early postischemic regional brain blood flow.
In this rodent global cerebral ischemic model, physiologic doses of estrogen are not deleterious to platelet reactivity and may initially reduce postischemic platelet reactivity.
</jats:p>
p11 mediates the BDNF-protective effects in dendritic outgrowth and spine formation in B27-deprived primary hippocampal cells 1. J Affect Disord. 2016 May 15;196:1-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jad.2016.02.010. Epub
2016  Feb 9.

p11 mediates the BDNF-protective effects in dendritic outgrowth and spine 
formation in B27-deprived primary hippocampal cells.

Park SW(1)
 Nhu le H(2), Cho HY(3), Seo MK(3), Lee CH(3), Ly NN(2), Choi CM(2), 
Lee BJ(4), Kim GM(4), Seol W(5), Lee JG(6), Kim YH(7).
Author information:
(1)Paik Institute for Clinical Research, Inje University, Busan, Republic of 
Korea; Department of health science and technology, Graduate School of Inje 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of health science and technology, Graduate School of Inje 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(3)Paik Institute for Clinical Research, Inje University, Busan, Republic of 
Korea.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
(5)InAm Neuroscience Research Center, Wonkwang University, Sanbon Hospital, 
Gunpo, kyeonggi-do, Republic of Korea.
(6)Paik Institute for Clinical Research, Inje University, Busan, Republic of 
Korea; Department of health science and technology, Graduate School of Inje 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea; Department of Psychiatry, School of 
Medicine, Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: iybihwc@naver.com.
(7)Paik Institute for Clinical Research, Inje University, Busan, Republic of 
Korea; Department of health science and technology, Graduate School of Inje 
University, Busan, Republic of Korea; Department of Psychiatry, School of 
Medicine, Haeundae Paik Hospital, Inje University, Busan, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: neuro109@hanmail.net.
BACKGROUND: p11 (S100A10) is a key regulator of depression-like behaviors and 
antidepressant drug response in rodent models.
Recent studies suggest that p11 
mediates the behavioral antidepressant action of brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) in rodents.
BDNF improves neural plasticity, which is linked to 
the cellular actions of antidepressant drugs.
In the present study, we 
investigated whether p11 regulated BDNF action on neural plasticity in vitro.
METHODS: We generated primary hippocampal cultures.
p11 expression, total 
dendritic length, and spine density were investigated under toxic conditions 
induced by B27 deprivation, which causes hippocampal cell death.
RESULTS: B27 deprivation significantly decreased p11 expression.
Treatment with 
BDNF significantly prevented the B27 deprivation-induced decrease in p11 levels 
in a concentration-dependent manner, whereas these concentrations had no effect 
on control cultures.
B27 deprivation significantly reduced the total length of 
hippocampal dendrites and spine density.
BDNF increased the total dendritic 
length and spine density in conditions with or without B27.
Furthermore, p11 
knockdown through small interfering RNA (siRNA) transfection blocked these 
effects.
The overexpression of p11 in B27-deprived cells increased the total 
dendritic length and spine density, and treatment with BDNF potentiated these 
effects.
LIMITATION: This study should be confirmed in animal models of depression.
CONCLUSION: Taken together, our data suggest that BDNF-induced improvement in 
neural plasticity may depend on the regulation of p11 in hippocampal cells with 
B27 deprivation.
These results provide evidence to strengthen the theoretical 
basis of a role for p11 in BDNF-induced antidepressant action.
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jad.2016.02.010
PMID: 26896741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Characterization of the RNA-binding activity of VP3
 a major structural protein of Infectious bursal disease virus 1.
Arch Virol.
2003 Apr;148(4):723-44. doi: 10.1007/s00705-002-0949-5.
Characterization of the RNA-binding activity of VP3, a major structural protein 
of Infectious bursal disease virus.
Kochan G(1), Gonzalez D, Rodriguez JF.
Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biología Molecular y Celular, Centro Nacional de 
Biotecnología, CSIC, Campus Universidad Autónoma de Madrid, Madrid, Spain.
Infectious bursal disease virus (IBDV) is the agent of an immune-depressive 
disease affecting the poultry industry worldwide.
Infection of IBDV leads to 
expression of five mature virus-encoded proteins.
Proteolytic processing of the 
virus-encoded polyprotein generates VP3 which coats the inner surface of the 
IBDV capsid.
In this report, we describe the characterization of the RNA-binding 
activity of VP3.
For these studies, the VP3 coding region was fused to a 
histidine tag and expressed in insect cells using a recombinant baculovirus.
The 
histidine-tagged VP3 was affinity-purified and used to study its ability to bind 
RNA molecules using three complementary methods: (i) Northwestern blotting; (ii) 
binding of VP3 protein-RNA complexes to nitrocellulose membranes; and (iii) 
electrophoretic mobility shift assays.
The results demonstrated that VP3 
efficiently bound ssRNA and dsRNA.
Under the experimental conditions used in 
this study, the formation of VP3-RNA complexes did not depend upon the presence 
of specific RNA sequences.
A series of histidine-tagged VP3 deletion mutants 
spanning the whole VP3 coding region were generated.
The use of these mutants 
revealed that the VP3 RNA-binding domain layed in a highly conserved 69 aa 
stretch close to the N-terminus of the protein.
DOI: 10.1007/s00705-002-0949-5
PMCID: PMC7086592
PMID: 12664296 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of an LHRH Agonist Analog upon Sexual Function in Male Dogs <jats:p>Male beagle dogs were injected once daily with 10 μg/ kg of [6‐D‐(2‐naphthyl)alanine]‐LHRH (D‐Nal(2)<jats:sup>6</jats:sup>‐LHRH)
 a potent LHRH agonist, for periods up to 42 days, with recovery periods up to 172 days.
Blood samples collected at regular intervals were assayed for LH, FSH, and testosterone; total ejaculates were collected and analyzed weekly, and animals were sacrificed at various intervals for sex organ weights and histology.
The first injection of D‐Nal(2)<jats:sup>6</jats:sup>‐LHRH caused an acute elevation in plasma levels of LH, FSH, and testosterone, measured at 2 and 4 hours after the injection.
This acute response to injection was attenuated with each successive injection and by two weeks no elevation was seen, suggesting a down‐regulation of pituitary response.
Basal levels of LH and testosterone were maximally depressed by four days of treatment.
Testis volume, duration of erection, ejaculate volume, sperm count, sperm motility and testis volume all declined during treatment, with sperm count significantly lowered by two weeks and ejaculation volume becoming zero by five weeks of treatment.
Spermatogenesis, assessed histologically, was partially suppressed at ten days and completely suppressed by 38 days of treatment.
All parameters returned to normal following cessation of treatment.
Recovery time was longer for the dogs treated for 42 days than for those treated for ten days.
When testosterone was supplemented during 42 days of agonist treatment, basal plasma testosterone levels were maintained at the low end of the normal range.
Testosterone supplementation did not prevent pituitary down‐regulation, suppression of spermatogenesis, or the decrease in testis and epididymis weights, but prevented the decline in duration of erection.
Ejaculate volume and sperm count declined more slowly with combination treatment than with agonist alone.
During the decline in sperm count sperm motility was maintained with combination treatment.
Injection of hCG into control and agonist treated dogs resulted in similar percentage increases in plasma levels of testosterone, although peak levels were greater in control than in treated animals.
The data suggest a pituitary desensitization with this LHRH agonist in the dog but only a minor role for testicular desensitization.</jats:p>
Embryonic development and mitochondrial function 1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1977 Feb;296(3):191-7. doi: 
10.1007/BF00498685.

Embryonic development and mitochondrial function. 2. Thiamphenicol induced 
embryotoxicity.

Bass R
 Oerter D.

Inhibition of mitochondrial protein synthesis in rat embryos during late 
organogenesis leads to impaired embryonic development.
1.
Thiamphenicol (TAP), 
similar to chloramphenicol, inhibits in vivo the synthesis of cytochrome oxidase 
(cytox), which is partially synthesized by the mitochondrion.
Subsequently, DNA 
synthesis and embryonic growth are affected.
2.
Embryos on day 10 and 11, in 
contrast to embryos on day 9 of gestation, show a high sensitivity of 
mitochondrial protein synthesis, measured as cytox activity.
From day 10 
onwards, such an inhibition leads to pronounced impairment of DNA synthesis.
The 
rat hemochorial placenta starts functioning on day 12 of gestation.
Larger doses 
of TAP are required to inhibit cytox and DNA synthesis for treatment after 
placentation rather than before placentation.
3.
Dose-response relationships 
differ depending on the date and duration of treatment.
Application of TAP for 1 
day requires 10-30 mg/kg TAP to inhibit cytox synthesis and 60-100 mg/kg to 
impair embryonic growth.
Prolongation of treatment to 4 days (day 10-13) lowers 
the dose required for inhibition of DNA synthesis to 10 mg TAP/kg/day.
This is 
lower than the human therapeutic dose.
Larger doses lead to embryolethality.
4.
The extent of inhibition of DNA synthesis provoked by inhibition of 
mitochondrial protein synthesis depends on a number of factors which include: 
different growth rates during organogenesis, the number of mitochondria present 
prior to treatment, availability of extramitochondrial ATP sources and placental 
permeability barrier.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00498685
PMID: 190546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Comparative study of the side effects of embikhin
 sarcolysin and asalin].
1.
Farmakol Toksikol.
1969 May-Jun;32(3):312-6.
[Comparative study of the side effects of embikhin, sarcolysin and asalin].
[Article in Russian]

Sof'ina ZP.
PMID: 5810949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Gene expression profile analysis of genes in rat hippocampus from antidepressant treated rats using DNA microarray <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Background</jats:title>
            <jats:p>The molecular and biological mechanisms by which many antidepressants function are based on the monoamine depletion hypothesis. However
 the entire cascade of mechanisms responsible for the therapeutic effect of antidepressants has not yet been elucidated.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Results</jats:title>
            <jats:p>We used a genome-wide microarray system containing 30,000 clones to evaluate total RNA that had been isolated from the brains of treated rats to identify the genes involved in the therapeutic mechanisms of various antidepressants, a tricyclic antidepressant (imipramine).
a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (fluoxetine), a monoamine oxidase inhibitor (phenelzine) and psychoactive herbal extracts of <jats:italic>Nelumbinis Semen</jats:italic> (NS).
To confirm the differential expression of the identified genes, we analyzed the amount of mRNA that was isolated from the hippocampus of rats that had been treated with antidepressants by real-time RT-PCR using primers specific for selected genes of interest.
These data demonstrate that antidepressants interfere with the expression of a large array of genes involved in signaling, survival and protein metabolism, suggesting that the therapeutic effect of these antidepressants is very complex.
Surprisingly, unlike other antidepressants, we found that the standardized herbal medicine, <jats:italic>Nelumbinis Semen</jats:italic>, is free of factors that can induce neurodegenerative diseases such as caspase 8, α-synuclein, and amyloid precursor protein.
In addition, the production of the inflammatory cytokine, IFNγ, was significantly decreased in rat hippocampus in response to treatment with antidepressants, while the inhibitory cytokine, TGFβ, was significantly enhanced.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title>
            <jats:p>These results suggest that antidepressants function by regulating neurotransmission as well as suppressing immunoreactivity in the central nervous system.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
Prevention of Thromboplastin‐Induced Intravascular Coagulation in Rabbits by Warfarin as Monitored by Thrombotest <jats:p>During sustained DIC in rabbits
 the protection by warfarin depended on the anticoagulant effect obtained, as reflected by Thrombotest (TT).
Moderate treatment (‘IT below 18 %) was sufficient to prevent decrease in thrombocytes and plasma content of various clotting factors, whereas more intense treatment (TT below 9 %) was required to prevent the Occurrence of soluble fibrin in plasma, as indicated by a positive ethanol gelation test.
The present observations suggest that, unless the ethanol test becomes negative, anticoagulant treatment must be considered as insufficient.</jats:p>
Long-term depression of naive synapses in adult hippocampus induced by asynchronous synaptic activity <jats:p> 1. Two independent Schaffer collateral pathways converging to the same pyramidal cell were alternately stimulated by 2-Hz trains (900 pulses) offset by a 150-ms interval in adult rat hippocampal slices. The second input underwent an immediate and persistent long-term depression (LTD). Depression in the first input was smaller than the second input. A narrower interpulse interval (20 ms) failed to induce LTD in either input. 2. Neither the N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor antagonist DL-2-amino-5-phosphonovaleric acid nor the metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist (+)-alpha-methyl-4-carboxylphenyl-glycine blocked this associative LTD. However
 coapplication of these two antagonists blocked LTD. 3.
Associative LTD was blocked by prior injection of the Ca2+ chelator bis-(o-aminophenoxy)-N,N,N',N'-tetraacetic acid into the postsynaptic cell and by bath-applied L-NG-nitroarginine, a nitric oxide synthesis inhibitor.
4.
We propose that temporally confined, asynchronous synaptic activity weakens the efficacy of naive synapses in slices from the adult hippocampus.
</jats:p>
Effects of population characteristics and structure on estimates of effective population size in a house sparrow metapopulation <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Effective population size (<jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub>) is a key parameter to understand evolutionary processes and the viability of endangered populations as it determines the rate of genetic drift and inbreeding. Low <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub> can lead to inbreeding depression and reduced population adaptability. In this study
 we estimated contemporary <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub> using genetic estimators (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">LDNE</jats:styled-content>,<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"> ON</jats:styled-content>e<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">SAMP</jats:styled-content>,<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"> MLNE</jats:styled-content> and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>o<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">N</jats:styled-content>e) as well as a demographic estimator in a natural insular house sparrow metapopulation.
We investigated whether population characteristics (population size, sex ratio, immigration rate, variance in population size and population growth rate) explained variation within and among populations in the ratio of effective to census population size (<jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub>/<jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>c</jats:italic></jats:sub>).
In general, <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub>/<jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>c</jats:italic></jats:sub> ratios increased with immigration rates.
Genetic <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub> was much larger than demographic <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub>, probably due to a greater effect of immigration on genetic than demographic processes in local populations.
Moreover, although estimates of genetic <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub> seemed to track <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>c</jats:italic></jats:sub> quite well, the genetic <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub>‐estimates were often larger than <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>c</jats:italic></jats:sub> within populations.
Estimates of genetic <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub> for the metapopulation were however within the expected range (&lt;<jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>c</jats:italic></jats:sub>).
Our results suggest that in fragmented populations, even low levels of gene flow may have important consequences for the interpretation of genetic estimates of <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub>.
Consequently, further studies are needed to understand how <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sub><jats:italic>e</jats:italic></jats:sub> estimated in local populations or the total metapopulation relates to actual rates of genetic drift and inbreeding.</jats:p>
The effect of diazepam upon local cerebral glucose use in the conscious rat 1. Neuroscience. 1986 Sep;19(1):257-65. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(86)90019-9.

The effect of diazepam upon local cerebral glucose use in the conscious rat.

Kelly PA
 Ford I, McCulloch J.
The effects of diazepam (0.1-1.0 mg/kg i.v.)
upon local cerebral glucose 
utilization, were analysed in 61 anatomically discrete areas of the conscious 
rat brain using [14C]-2-deoxyglucose quantitative autoradiography.
The 
administration of diazepam resulted in significant reductions in the rate of 
glucose use in every region investigated.
The regional pattern of alterations in 
glucose utilization was rather homogeneous, with the majority of brain regions 
analysed showing reductions of between 20 and 40% in response to 0.3 mg/kg 
diazepam.
Only two regions of the central nervous system differed significantly 
from the widespread, homogeneous reductions.
In the mammillary body, the rate of 
glucose utilization was more sensitive to depression than elsewhere in the brain 
(55% reductions following 0.3 mg/kg diazepam), whilst in the lateral amygdala, 
the rate of glucose use was less sensitive (8% reductions following 0.3 mg/kg 
diazepam).
The effects of diazepam were compared to those elicited by i.v.
injection of the gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) agonists, muscimol and 
tetrahydroisoxazolopyridinol (THIP), as reported previously by the authors.
Although muscimol and THIP, like diazepam, reduced glucose use in every region 
of the brain, visual inspection of the autoradiograms suggested that whilst the 
patterns of regional responsiveness to the two GABA agonists were almost 
identical, they were different to the pattern of response evoked by diazepam.
A 
rigorous system of analysis was devised making use of the dose-response profiles 
in each of the 61 brain areas to construct a regional hierarchy of 
responsiveness to the three drugs and allowing comparison of their effects on 
the brain as a whole.
This critical form of data evaluation revealed that there 
was a more regionally homogeneous response to diazepam than to either muscimol 
or THIP, and whilst the regional hierarchy of responses to the GABA agonists was 
very similar, both differed from diazepam.
It would appear that whilst 
benzodiazepines may interact with the GABA receptor, their effects upon the 
integrated functional activity of the brain as a whole differs markedly from 
that evoked by putative GABA receptor agonists.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(86)90019-9
PMID: 3785666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A history of caloric restriction induces neurochemical and behavioral changes in rats consistent with models of depression 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2007 May;87(1):104-14. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2007.04.005.  Epub 2007 Apr 11.

A history of caloric restriction induces neurochemical and behavioral changes in 
rats consistent with models of depression.

Chandler-Laney PC(1)
 Castaneda E, Pritchett CE, Smith ML, Giddings M, Artiga 
AI, Boggiano MM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Behavioral Neuroscience Division, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham, Birmingham, AL 35294-1170, USA.
pchandle@uab.edu

A history of dieting is common in individuals suffering from eating disorders 
for which depression and mood disturbances are also comorbid.
We investigated 
the effect of a history of caloric restriction (HCR) in rats that involved 
cyclic food restriction and refeeding with varying levels of access to palatable 
food (PF) on: 1) responses to the SSRI, fluoxetine; 2) monoamine levels in brain 
regions central to the control of feeding, reward, and mood regulation; and 3) 
behavioral tests of anxiety and depression.
HCR coupled with intermittent but 
not daily access to PF exaggerated rats' anorectic response to fluoxetine 
(p<0.05); was associated with a significant 71% and 58% reduction of 5-HT and 
dopamine, respectively, in the medial prefrontal cortex; and induced behaviors 
consistent with models of depression.
HCR, irrespective of access to PF, 
abolished the strong association between 5-HT and dopamine turnover in the 
nucleus accumbens in control rats (r=0.71 vs. -0.06, p<0.01).
Access to PF, 
irrespective of HCR, reduced hypothalamic dopamine.
Together, these findings 
suggest that a history of frequent food restriction-induced weight fluctuation 
imposes neurochemical changes that negatively impact feeding and mood 
regulation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2007.04.005
PMCID: PMC1949489
PMID: 17490740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adoptively Transferred Dendritic Cells Restore Primary Cell-Mediated Inflammatory Competence to Acutely Malnourished Weanling Mice 1. Am J Pathol. 2008 Feb;172(2):378-85. doi: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.070456. Epub
2008  Jan 17.

Adoptively transferred dendritic cells restore primary cell-mediated 
inflammatory competence to acutely malnourished weanling mice.

Hillyer L(1)
 Whitley C, Olver A, Webster M, Steevels T, Woodward B.
Author information:
(1)Department of Human Health and Nutritional Sciences, University of Guelph, 
ON, Canada N1G 2W1.
Immune depression associated with prepubescent malnutrition underlies a 
staggering burden of infection-related morbidity.
This investigation centered on 
dendritic cells as potentially decisive in this phenomenon.
C57BL/6J mice, 
initially 19 days old, had free access for 14 days to a complete diet or to a 
low-protein formulation that induced wasting deficits of protein and energy.
Mice were sensitized by i.p.
injection of sheep red blood cells on day 9, at 
which time one-half of the animals in each dietary group received a simultaneous 
injection of 10(6) syngeneic dendritic cells (JAWS II).
All mice were challenged 
with the immunizing antigen in the right hind footpad on day 13, and the 24-hour 
delayed hypersensitivity response was assessed as percentage increase in footpad 
thickness.
The low-protein diet reduced the inflammatory immune response, but 
JAWS cells, which exhibited immature phenotypic and functional characteristics, 
increased the response of both the malnourished group and the controls.
By 
contrast, i.p.
injection of 10(6) syngeneic T cells did not influence the 
inflammatory immune response of mice subjected to the low-protein protocol.
Antigen-presenting cell numbers limited primary inflammatory cell-mediated 
competence in this model of wasting malnutrition, an outcome that challenges the 
prevailing multifactorial model of malnutrition-associated immune depression.
Thus, a new dendritic cell-centered perspective emerges regarding the cellular 
mechanism underlying immune depression in acute pediatric protein and energy 
deficit.
DOI: 10.2353/ajpath.2008.070456
PMCID: PMC2312357
PMID: 18202192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Serotonin 5-HT7 receptor agents: Structure-activity relationships and potential therapeutic applications in central nervous system disorders 1. Pharmacol Ther. 2011 Feb;129(2):120-48. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.08.013.
 Epub 2010 Oct 20.

Serotonin 5-HT7 receptor agents: Structure-activity relationships and potential 
therapeutic applications in central nervous system disorders.

Leopoldo M(1)
 Lacivita E, Berardi F, Perrone R, Hedlund PB.
Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Farmaco-Chimico, Università degli Studi di Bari "A. Moro", via 
Orabona, 4, 70125 Bari, Italy.
leopoldo@farmchim.uniba.it

Since its discovery in the 1940s in serum, the mammalian intestinal mucosa, and 
in the central nervous system, serotonin (5-HT) has been shown to be involved in 
virtually all cognitive and behavioral human functions, and alterations in its 
neurochemistry have been implicated in the etiology of a plethora of 
neuropsychiatric disorders.
The cloning of 5-HT receptor subtypes has been of 
importance in enabling them to be classified as specific protein molecules 
encoded by specific genes.
The 5-HT(7) receptor is the most recently classified 
member of the serotonin receptor family.
Since its identification, it has been 
the subject of intense research efforts driven by its presence in functionally 
relevant regions of the brain.
The availability of some selective antagonists 
and agonists, in combination with genetically modified mice lacking the 5-HT(7) 
receptor, has allowed for a better understanding of the pathophysiological role 
of this receptor.
This paper reviews data on localization and pharmacological 
properties of the 5-HT(7) receptor, and summarizes the results of 
structure-activity relationship studies aimed at the discovery of selective 
5-HT(7) receptor ligands.
Additionally, an overview of the potential therapeutic 
applications of 5-HT(7) receptor agonists and antagonists in central nervous 
system disorders is presented.
Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2010.08.013
PMCID: PMC3031120
PMID: 20923682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Einfluß von Endoxan (Cyclophosphamid) und 6-Mercaptopurin auf den Nucleinsäure-Stoffwechsel der Rattenmilz während der Synthese von Antikörpern gegen Brucella abortus <jats:p>1. Endoxan hemmt
 insbesondere während der Erstimmunisierung, die Ausbildung von Antikörpern gegen Brucella abortus; 6-Mercaptopurin hat einen weitaus geringeren Effekt.</jats:p>
               <jats:p>2.
Beide Substanzen vermindern die DNS-Synthese in der Rattenmilz erheblich, die der RNS hingegen nur wenig.</jats:p>
               <jats:p>3.
Die Induktion der Tyrosin-α-Ketoglutarat-Transaminase in der Rattenleber wird durch Endoxan nicht gestört.</jats:p>
               <jats:p>4.
Diese Ergebnisse lassen den Schluß zu, daß bei der Erstimmunisierung zur Ausbildung der Antikörper eine DNS-Synthese unerläßlich ist.</jats:p>
Deficient brightness discrimination acquisition produced by daily intracranial injections of penicillin in rats 1. Behav Biol. 1974 Dec;12(4):445-60. doi: 10.1016/s0091-6773(74)92251-2.

Deficient brightness discrimination acquisition produced by daily intracranial 
injections of penicillin in rats.

Woodruff ML
 Kearley RC, Isaacson RL.
DOI: 10.1016/s0091-6773(74)92251-2
PMID: 4451538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Interferon Inhibition by Narcotic Analgesics 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1973 Jan;142(1):106-11. doi:
10.3181/00379727-142-36968.

Interferon inhibition by narcotic analgesics.

Hung CY
 Lefkowitz SS, Geber WF.
DOI: 10.3181/00379727-142-36968
PMID: 4345713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mapping Pathways From Stress to Cancer Progression 1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 2008 Jul 2;100(13):914-5
 917. doi: 10.1093/jnci/djn229.
Epub 2008 Jun 24.
Mapping pathways from stress to cancer progression.
Ross K.

DOI: 10.1093/jnci/djn229
PMID: 18577741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Modulation of A1 adenosine receptor function in rat brain by the polyamine
 spermine 1.
Neurosci Lett.
1991 Apr 1;124(2):183-6. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(91)90089-c.

Modulation of A1 adenosine receptor function in rat brain by the polyamine, 
spermine.
Wasserkort R(1), Hoppe E, Reddington M, Schubert P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuromorphology, Max-Planck-Institute of Psychiatry, 
Martinsreid, F.R.G.
Studies on factors modulating the binding of agonist ligands to A1 adenosine 
receptors in rat forebrain membranes revealed that the reduction of 
[3H]cyclohexyladenosine [( 3H]CHA) binding, observed after removing Mg2+ by 
pretreatment with ethylene-dinitrilo-tetraacetic acid (EDTA), was restored by 
the polyamine, spermine (1mM).
Parallel electrophysiological experiments 
performed on rat hippocampal slices in Mg(2+)-free medium indicated that 
spermine also led to a recovery of the depressive effect of 1 microM adenosine 
on stimulus train-evoked neuronal Ca2+ influx.
These observations suggest that 
the polyamine, spermine is, like Mg2+, able to control the physiological 
adenosine-mediated modulation of synaptic transmission by changing the affinity 
state of A1 receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(91)90089-c
PMID: 1648689 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Electrophysiologic effects of 3-(p-chlorophenyl)-(2-imadazolin-2-yl-methyl)-1
2,3,4-tetrahydro-1-benzepine hydrochloride (SU-13197), a new antiarrhythmic agent.
1.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther.
1968 Jan;159(1):146-52.
Electrophysiologic effects of 
3-(p-chlorophenyl)-(2-imadazolin-2-yl-methyl)-1,2,3,4-tetrahydro-1-benzepine 
hydrochloride (SU-13197), a new antiarrhythmic agent.
Watanabe Y, Dreifus LS.
PMID: 5643942 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Dynamics of transcallosal potentials following local exposure of the cerebral cortex to high temperature]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1977 Oct;84(10):408-11.

[Dynamics of transcallosal potentials following local exposure of the cerebral 
cortex to high temperature].

[Article in Russian]

Bulochnik ED
 Kurbatov MG.
Experiments were conducted on cats, anesthetized with nembutal.
The influence of 
local heating of the sensomotor cortex on the transcallosum response was 
examined.
It was revealed that heating for short and long periods of limited 
regions of the cortex of both hemispheres induced a primary depression of the 
negative component of the transcallosum response at 44 degrees C and above it.
The depression was replaced by an irreversible block of both response phases at 
47--49 degrees C. It was concluded that the direct inhibitory influence of high 
temperatures on the cortical neurons was expressed only within the range of 
extreme temperature incompatible with vital activity of the whole organism.
Experiments with the thermal block of the hemisphere region could testify to the 
fact that the transcallosum responses occurred mainly as a result of the direct 
irritation of the callosum fibers by stimulating electrodes and entirely 
reflected the post-synaptic potentials.
PMID: 912052 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
σ-1 Receptors (σ1 Binding Sites) Form Raft-Like Microdomains and Target Lipid Droplets on the Endoplasmic Reticulum: Roles in Endoplasmic Reticulum Lipid Compartmentalization and Export 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2003 Aug;306(2):718-25. doi: 10.1124/jpet.103.051284.
Epub  2003 May 2.

Sigma-1 receptors (sigma(1) binding sites) form raft-like microdomains and 
target lipid droplets on the endoplasmic reticulum: roles in endoplasmic 
reticulum lipid compartmentalization and export.

Hayashi T(1)
 Su TP.
Author information:
(1)Cellular Pathobiology Unit, Cellular Neurobiology Research Branch, Intramural 
Research Program, National Institute on Drug Abuse, National Institutes of 
Health, Department of Health and Human Services, Baltimore, MD 21224, USA.
The brain sigma-1 receptors can bind neurosteroids and psychotropic drugs, 
including neuroleptics and cocaine and are implicated in schizophrenia, 
depression, and drug dependence.
In this study, we found that sigma-1 receptors 
specifically target lipid storage sites (lipid droplets) on the endoplasmic 
reticulum by forming a distinct class of lipid microdomains.
Both endogenously 
expressing sigma-1 receptors and transfected C-terminally enhanced yellow 
fluorescent protein (EYFP)-tagged sigma-1 receptors (Sig-1R-EYFP) target unique 
"ring-like" structures associated with endoplasmic reticulum reticular networks 
in NG108-15 cells.
The ring-like structures contain neutral lipids and are 
enlarged by the oleate treatment, indicating that they are endoplasmic 
reticulum-associated lipid droplets (ER-LDs).
sigma-1 receptors colocalize with 
caveolin-2, a cholesterol-binding protein in lipid rafts on the ER-LDs, but not 
with adipocyte differentiation-related protein (ADRP), a cytosolic lipid droplet 
(c-LD)-specific protein.
When the double-arginine ER retention signal on the N 
terminus of sigma-1 receptors is truncated, sigma-1 receptors no longer exist on 
ER-LDs, but predominantly target c-LDs, which contain ADRP.
sigma-1 receptors on 
ER-LDs form detergent-resistant raft-like lipid microdomains, the buoyancy of 
which is different from that of plasma membrane lipid rafts.
(+)-Pentazocine 
causes sigma-1 receptors to disappear from the microdomains.
N-Terminally 
EYFP-tagged sigma-1 receptors (EYFP-Sig-1R) failed to target ER-LDs.
EYFP-Sig-1R-transfected cells showed an unrestricted distribution of neutral 
lipids all over the endoplasmic reticulum network, decreases in c-LDs and 
cholesterol in plasma membranes, and the bulbous aggregation of endoplasmic 
reticulum.
Thus, sigma-1 receptors are unique endoplasmic reticulum proteins 
that regulate the compartmentalization of lipids on the endoplasmic reticulum 
and their export from the endoplasmic reticulum to plasma membrane and c-LDs.
DOI: 10.1124/jpet.103.051284
PMID: 12730355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
T cell-dependent helper and suppressive influences in an adoptive IgG antibody response. 1. Immunology. 1975 Mar;28(3):485-95.

T cell-dependent helper and suppressive influences in an adoptive IgG antibody 
response.

Arrenbrecht S
 Mitchell GF.
When immune spleen cells of mice immunized to a hapten carrier preparation 4 
days previously were transferred to normal syngeneic hosts, they began to 
produce 7S antibody (presumably of the IgG class), provided that relatively 
small numbers of cells (about 1/10 spleen equivalent) were transferred.
Increasing the number of transferred cells resulted in less IgG antibody formed.
Depletion of the immune spleen cells of T cells by treatment with anti-theta 
serum and complement prevented IgG antibody formation.
IgG antibody production 
by untreated and anti-therta serum-treated immune spleen cells could be enhanced 
(reinduced) by addition of small numbers of cells enriched for carrier-activated 
T cells.
These suggest that T cells are necessary to stimulate antigen-activated 
B cells into IgG antibody production.
Larger numbers of 'carrier-activated T 
cells' depressed IgG antibody production.
Both enhancement and depression could 
be demonstrated to be antigen-specific.
IgG antibody production high numbers of 
transferred immune spleen cells could be induced by treating the cells prior to 
transfer with suboptimal amounts of anti-theta serum and complement.
It is 
argued that this results from the elimination of a T cell-dependent suppressor 
influence arising during a normal immune response.
PMCID: PMC1445786
PMID: 1092611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Alterations in Renal Vascular Reactivity Induced by Chronic Central Administration of Captopril in the Spontaneously Hypertensive Rat 1. Clin Exp Hypertens A. 1986;8(7):1081-106. doi: 10.3109/10641968609045476.

Alterations in renal vascular reactivity induced by chronic central 
administration of captopril in the spontaneously hypertensive rat.

Berecek KH
 Shier DN.
We have previously demonstrated that chronic intracerebroventricular (ICV) 
administration of captopril attenuates the development of hypertension in young 
SHR in association with a depression in whole animal reactivity to vasoactive 
agents and an increased baroreflex sensitivity.
In the present study we analyzed 
vascular reactivity in perfused kidneys from SHR treated with captopril or 
vehicle to determine whether the depression in reactivity was due to changes in 
baroreflex activity or an effect on the vasculature.
Captopril (1.25 
micrograms/hr) was infused (osmotic mini pumps) for 4 weeks.
Vascular reactivity 
to norepinephrine, angiotensin and vasopressin was assessed in isolated kidneys 
perfused with an artificial medium at constant flow.
SHR treated with ICV 
captopril showed a significantly lower arterial pressure and basal renal 
vascular resistance than SHR treated with ICV vehicle or IV captopril.
In 
addition, these rats showed decreased vascular reactivity to all vasoactive 
agents tested as signified by a shift in the dose-response curves to the right 
with an increase in threshold (ED16) and ED50.
Kidneys from WKY treated with ICV 
captopril also showed a decrease in vascular reactivity in comparison to WKY 
treated with ICV vehicle.
Our data suggest that captopril, through a central 
action, attenuates the development of hypertension by decreasing vascular 
reactivity to vasoconstrictors.
DOI: 10.3109/10641968609045476
PMID: 3533326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Analytical determination and pharmacokinetics of robenacoxib in the dog <jats:p>An analytical method was developed and validated for the measurement of the novel analgesic and anti‐inflammatory drug robenacoxib in blood and plasma of dogs and cats. To prevent nonreproducible carry‐over effects
 an initial solid phase extraction procedure was followed by high pressure liquid chromatography analysis for samples with concentrations in the range 500 to 20 000 ng/mL.
To improve accuracy, samples of concentration 3 to 100 ng/mL were analyzed by liquid chromatography‐mass spectrometry.
Applying these methods, blood concentration‐time profiles and pharmacokinetic variables of robenacoxib in dogs were determined in a four‐phase cross‐over study, which compared different routes of administration of the drug, including intravenous (i.v.)
injection, oral application with and without feed, and subcutaneous (s.c.) application.
After i.v.
administration the mean clearance from blood was 0.81 L/kg/h, the volume of distribution was 0.77 L/kg for the elimination phase and 0.24 L/kg for steady‐state, and the terminal half‐life in blood was 0.63 h. Maximum blood concentrations were obtained in less than 1 h following oral or s.c. application.
Absolute bioavailability was 88% after s.c. injection, 84% after oral administration to fasted dogs, but was reduced to 62% when applied orally to fed dogs.
In canine and feline plasma the degree of binding of robenacoxib to plasma protein <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> was greater than 98%.
The blood:plasma concentration ratio was 0.44:1 in the dog and 0.65:1 in the cat.
In conclusion analytical methods for the quantification of robenacoxib in blood and plasma in the dog and cat were developed and validated.
In dogs, robenacoxib has good bioavailability after oral (84%) and subcutaneous (88%) administration.</jats:p>
[Action of goitrogens on tadpoles of the toad
 Bufo bufo L].
1.
Arch Anat Histol Embryol.
1969;52(5):313 passim.
[Action of goitrogens on tadpoles of the toad, Bufo bufo L].
[Article in French]

Mira-Moser F.

PMID: 4100800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Interaction between dietary 1
25‐dihydroxycholecalciferol and calcium and effects of management on the occurrence of tibial dyschondroplasia, leg abnormalities and performance in broiler chickens 1.
Br Poult Sci.
1995 Jul;36(3):465-77. doi: 10.1080/00071669508417792.
Interaction between dietary 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol and calcium and 
effects of management on the occurrence of tibial dyschondroplasia, leg 
abnormalities and performance in broiler chickens.
Rennie JS(1), McCormack HA, Farquharson C, Berry JL, Mawer EB, Whitehead CC.
Author information:
(1)Roslin Institute (Edinburgh), Midlothian, England.
1.
Two experiments were performed to compare the relative effectiveness of 
feeding 1,25-dihydroxycholecalciferol (1,25-DHCC) in minimising leg 
abnormalities in broilers with other methods and to investigate interactions 
between dietary 1,25-DHCC and calcium.
2.
Adding 5 micrograms 1,25-DHCC/kg to a 
diet containing 12 g calcium/kg was more effective than early food restriction 
or meal feeding in preventing leg abnormalities but was found to cause a growth 
depression.
3.
The second experiment, which had a factorial design, with diets 
containing 7.5, 10.0 and 12.5 g calcium and 0, 2.0, 3.5 and 5.0 micrograms 
1,25-DHCC/kg, showed linear and quadratic interactions between these dietary 
factors.
Diets with higher concentrations of both 1,25-DHCC and calcium resulted 
in growth depression associated with hypercalcaemia.
4.
The incidence of tibial 
dyschondroplasia (TD) at 3 weeks of age was highest with the basal diet 
containing 7.5 g calcium/kg and was markedly reduced by addition of 1,25-DHCC 
and/or calcium.
The incidence was very low or non-existent when 1,25-DHCC was 
fed at 3.5 micrograms/kg or greater.
5.
Feeding 5 micrograms/kg 1,25-DHCC had no 
effect on plasma 1,25-DHCC concentrations, although at the higher dietary 
calcium contents plasma concentrations of 25-hydroxy- and 
24,25-dihydroxy-cholecalciferol were lower in those birds fed 1,25-DHCC.
6.
It 
is concluded that 1,25-DHCC is most effective in preventing TD without 
accompanying growth depression when it is fed in conjunction with diets 
containing less than 10 g calcium/kg.
DOI: 10.1080/00071669508417792
PMID: 7583377 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
TCM Formula Xiaoyaosan Decoction Improves Depressive-Like Behaviors in Rats with Type 2 Diabetes <jats:p>The mechanism of depression with type 2 diabetes remains elusive
 requiring further study.<jats:italic>Objective</jats:italic>.
To evaluate the effect of TCM formula Xiaoyaosan on depressive-like behaviors in rats with type 2 diabetes.<jats:italic>Methods</jats:italic>.
Rats were divided into 5 groups and drugs were administered during the model period of 21 days.
The model of depressive-like behaviors in rats with type 2 diabetes was induced by a high fat diet, low doses of STZ injection, and chronic restraint stress for 21 days.
The body weight, fasting blood glucose, ITT, OGTT, 5-HT, DA, depression behaviors, and morphological changes of formation were measured and observed.<jats:italic>Results</jats:italic>.
After modeling, marked changes were found in model rats; behavioral analyses of rats indicated that this modeling method negatively impacts locomotor function.
In the H&amp;E staining, changes were found predominately in the CA1 and DG subregions of the hippocampus.
After 21 days of treatment by fluoxetine and Xiaoyaosan, rats’ body weights, behaviors and fasting blood glucose, and hippocampal formation were modified.<jats:italic>Conclusions</jats:italic>.
A new model of depressive-like behaviors in rats with type 2 diabetes was successfully created.
Xiaoyaosan and fluoxetine in this study independently contribute to exacerbate the disease progression.</jats:p>
Fisher information and temporal correlations for spiking neurons with stochastic dynamics 1. Phys Rev E Stat Phys Plasmas Fluids Relat Interdiscip Topics. 2000 Apr;61(4 Pt
 B):4235-52. doi: 10.1103/physreve.61.4235.

Fisher information and temporal correlations for spiking neurons with stochastic 
dynamics.

Karbowski J(1).

Author information:
(1)Center for Biodynamics
 Department of Mathematics, Boston University, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02215, USA.
Population coding accuracy can be studied using Fisher information.
Here the 
Fisher information and correlation functions are determined analytically for a 
network of coupled spiking neurons with a more general than Poisson stochastic 
dynamics.
It is shown that stimulus-driven temporal correlations between neurons 
always increase the Fisher information, whereas stimulus-independent 
correlations need not do so.
Additionally, we find that for subthreshold stimuli 
there is some nonzero level of noise for which network coding is optimal.
We 
also find that the Fisher information is larger for purely excitatory than for 
purely inhibitory networks, but only in a limited range of values of synaptic 
coupling strengths.
In most cases the dependence of the Fisher information on 
time is linear, except for excitatory networks with strong synaptic couplings 
and for strong stimuli.
In the latter case this dependence shows two distinct 
regimes: fast and slow.
For excitatory networks short-term synaptic depression 
can improve the coding accuracy significantly, whereas short-term facilitation 
can lower the coding accuracy.
For inhibitory networks, coding accuracy is 
insensitive to short-term synaptic dynamics.
DOI: 10.1103/physreve.61.4235
PMID: 11088220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selective effects of adenosine receptor agonists upon coronary resistance and heart rate in isolated working rabbit hearts 1. Life Sci. 1985 Jan 14;36(2):127-37. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(85)90091-8.

Selective effects of adenosine receptor agonists upon coronary resistance and 
heart rate in isolated working rabbit hearts.

Haleen SJ
 Evans DB.
Dose dependent changes in heart rate (HR) and coronary resistance (CR) were 
determined for adenosine, 5'-N-ethylcarboxamide adenosine (NECA) and 
l-N6-phenylisopropyladenosine (l-PIA) over a dose range of 1 X 10(-9) to 1 x 
10(-5) M. Changes in CR were determined under controlled metabolic demand 
conditions (constant mean aortic pressure, constant mean left atrial pressure, 
and constant HR).
Decreases in HR were determined by allowing the paced hearts 
to beat spontaneously between doses for 15 seconds.
Adenosine significantly 
decreased CR and HR at greater than or equal to 1 X 10(-5) M. NECA significantly 
decreased both CR and HR at greater than or equal to 3 X 10(-8) M. l-PIA 
significantly decreased HR at greater than or equal to 3 X 10(-8) M; however a 
dose at greater than or equal to 3 X 10(-6) M was required to significantly 
decrease CR.
These results provide evidence that the coronary vasodilator action 
of adenosine may primarily be mediated by A2 receptors.
Furthermore, the data 
are in support of previous observations that the bradycardic action of adenosine 
is principally mediated via A1 receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(85)90091-8
PMID: 3965846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
CYTOSOLIC Ca2+ CONCENTRATION AND CONTRACTION-RELAXATION PROPERTIES OF VENTRICULAR MYOCYTES FROM ESCHERICHIA COLI ENDOTOXEMIC GUINEA PIGS 1. Shock. 1997 May;7(5):383-8. doi: 10.1097/00024382-199705000-00012.

Cytosolic Ca2+ concentration and contraction-relaxation properties of 
ventricular myocytes from Escherichia coli endotoxemic guinea pigs: effect of 
fluid resuscitation.

Zhong J(1)
 Adams HR, Rubin LJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Biomedical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Missouri, Columbia 65211, USA.
Hearts isolated from a guinea pig model of Escherichia coli endotoxemia exhibit 
decreased systolic contractile function and reduced diastolic compliance of the 
left ventricle within 4 h after injection of endotoxin.
Fluid resuscitation 
prevented the endotoxin-induced decrease in diastolic compliance without 
affecting systolic contractile depression.
Because intrinsic myocardial 
dysfunction after endotoxemia may result from alterations in intracellular Ca2+ 
handling, we tested the hypothesis that in vivo fluid resuscitation improved 
diastolic function by altering Ca2+ handling of the myocardium.
We tested this 
hypothesis by measuring cell shortening and intracellular Ca2+ of ventricular 
myocytes isolated from endotoxemic guinea pigs.
E. coli endotoxin (LPS, 1 
mg/kg)-injected guinea pigs were divided into resuscitated and nonresuscitated 
groups.
Fluid resuscitated animals received a Ringer's infusion (8 mL.kg-1.h-1) 
intravenously (i.v.)
beginning immediately after endotoxin injection.
Four hours 
later, ventricular myocytes were isolated enzymatically and loaded with 
fura-2/AM.
When myocytes were field stimulated at .8 Hz, peak systolic Ca2+ 
transients of LPS-resuscitated (619 +/- 75 nM) and LPS-nonresuscitated (599 +/- 
60 nM) myocytes were not significantly different from each other, but both were 
significantly less than values from control myocytes (1187 +/- 118 nM, p < .05).
The percentage of cell shortening of LPS-resuscitated (6.2 +/- .9%) and 
LPS-nonresuscitated (6.2 +/- .3%) myocytes were also less than control (11.8 +/- 
.5%, p < .05).
In contrast to improved diastolic compliance of 
fluid-resuscitated hearts, diastolic [Ca2+]i of myocytes (at .8 Hz) from 
LPS-resuscitated animals (138 +/- 47 nM) was not statistically different from 
LPS-nonresuscitated animals (129 +/- 19 nM).
Diastolic values of both LPS groups 
were consistently lower than control value (251 +/- 38 nM, p < .05).
These data 
suggest that improved diastolic compliance of LPS hearts following fluid 
resuscitation is not associated with improved myocyte contractility or 
myoplasmic Ca2+ handling.
DOI: 10.1097/00024382-199705000-00012
PMID: 9165675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Influence of preexperimental blood pressure level on hypotensive responses to vasodilator drugs. 1. Arch Farmacol Toxicol. 1975 Aug;1(2):91-8.

Influence of preexperimental blood pressure level on hypotensive responses to 
vasodilator drugs.

Serrano JS
 Pelayo F, Tamargo JL, García De Jalón PD.
PMID: 1230033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dynorphin inhibits basal forebrain cholinergic neurons by pre‐ and postsynaptic mechanisms <jats:sec><jats:title>Key points</jats:title><jats:p><jats:list list-type="bullet">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The basal forebrain is an important component of the ascending arousal system and may be a key site through which the orexin neurons promote arousal.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>It has long been known that orexin‐A and ‐B excite basal forebrain cholinergic neurons
 but orexin‐producing neurons also make the inhibitory peptide dynorphin.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Using whole‐cell recordings in brain slices, we found that dynorphin‐A directly inhibits basal forebrain cholinergic neurons via κ‐opioid receptors, and decreases afferent excitatory synaptic input to these neurons.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>While the effects of dynorphin‐A and orexin‐A desensitize over multiple applications, co‐application of dynorphin‐A and orexin‐A produces a sustained response that reverses depending on the membrane potential of basal forebrain cholinergic neurons.
At −40 mV the net effect of the co‐application is inhibition by dynorphin‐A, whereas at −70 mV the excitatory response to orexin‐A prevails.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The basal forebrain (BF) is an essential component of the ascending arousal systems and may be a key site through which the orexin (also known as hypocretin) neurons drive arousal and promote the maintenance of normal wakefulness.
All orexin neurons also make dynorphin, and nearly all brain regions innervated by the orexin neurons express kappa opiate receptors, the main receptor for dynorphin.
This is remarkable because orexin excites target neurons including BF neurons, but dynorphin has inhibitory effects.
We identified the sources of dynorphin input to the magnocellular preoptic nucleus and substantia innominata (MCPO/SI) in mice and determined the effects of dynorphin‐A on MCPO/SI cholinergic neurons using patch‐clamp recordings in brain slices.
We found that the orexin neurons are the main source of dynorphin input to the MCPO/SI region, and dynorphin‐A inhibits MCPO/SI cholinergic neurons through κ‐opioid receptors by (1) activation of a G protein‐coupled inwardly rectifying potassium current, (2) inhibition of a voltage‐gated Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> current and (3) presynaptic depression of the glutamatergic input to these neurons.
The responses both to dynorphin‐A and to orexin‐A desensitize, but co‐application of dynorphin‐A and orexin‐A produces a sustained response.
In addition, the polarity of the response to the co‐application depends on the membrane potential of BF neurons; at −40 mV the net effect of the co‐application is inhibition by dynorphin‐A, whereas at −70 mV the excitatory response to orexin‐A prevails.
This suggests that depending on their state of activation, BF cholinergic neurons can be excited or inhibited by signals from the orexin neurons.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Interaction of butorphanol
 with monoamine oxidase inhibitor, tranylcypromine 1.
Forensic Sci Int.
1991 Mar;49(2):185-92. doi: 10.1016/0379-0738(91)90078-w.

Interaction of butorphanol, with monoamine oxidase inhibitor, tranylcypromine.
Gomaa AA(1), Mohammed LH, Ahmed HN, Farghaly AM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Assiut University, Egypt.
This investigation examines the possibility of interaction between 
tranylcypromine and butorphanol in comparison to pethidine.
The LD50 of 
pethidine and butorphanol were determined in mice pretreated with the 
non-selective monoamine oxidase (MAO) inhibitor, tranylcypromine orally for 8 
days or with oral saline solution.
Tranylcypromine decreased the LD50 of both 
pethidine and butorphanol by 78% and 41%, respectively.
Anesthetized rabbits 
with halothane pretreated with tranylcypromine or saline were given pethidine (5 
mg/kg i.v.)
or butorphanol (0.5, 1 and 2 mg/kg i.v.).
Pethidine produced a 
marked increase in blood pressure in rabbits pretreated with tranylcypromine and 
did not affect significantly the heart rate.
Butorphanol did not affect either 
blood pressure or heart rate at doses of 0.5 or 1 mg/kg.
However, the largest 
dose of butorphanol (2 mg/kg) produced hypotension and tachycardia in rabbits 
pretreated with tranylcypromine.
Neither pethidine nor butorphanol affected the 
temperature of anesthetized rabbits pretreated with tranylcypromine or saline.
DOI: 10.1016/0379-0738(91)90078-w
PMID: 1855717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The mechanism of mitochondrial swelling 1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1969 Jan;129(1):158-72. doi:
10.1016/0003-9861(69)90162-3.

The mechanism of mitochondrial swelling. II. Pseudoenergized swelling in the 
presence of alkali metal salts.

Blondin GA
 Vail WJ, Green DE.
DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(69)90162-3
PMID: 5762961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Uridylate Kinase Activity: Effect of Isoproterenol <jats:p>
            Isoproterenol stimulates cell proliferation in mouse salivary glands. Prior to the stimulation of DNA synthesis

            <jats:sup>3</jats:sup>
            H-uridine incorporation into RNA is decreased.
This decreased incorporation results from a depression of uridylate kinase activity.
</jats:p>
Somatostatin inhibits the mitogenic effect of thyroliberin 1. Experientia. 1978 Feb 15;34(2):271-2. doi: 10.1007/BF01944723.

Somatostatin inhibits the mitogenic effect of thyroliberin.

Pawlikowski M
 Kunnert-Radek J, Stepień H.

The effect of somatostatin and of thyroliberin on the mitotic incidence in the 
organ-cultured anterior pituitary lobe of the rat was investigated, using the 
colchicine metaphase-arrest technique.
It was found that somatostatin added to 
the culture medium, together with thyroliberin, blocked the mitogenic effect of 
the latter.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01944723
PMID: 414934 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
II. Tumor growth at sites of inflammation induced by mitogens in mice. 1. Am J Pathol. 1981 Aug;104(2):125-31.

II. Tumor growth at sites of inflammation induced by mitogens in mice.

Nelson M
 Nelson DS.
Experiments were carried out to determine whether the growth of tumors could be 
influenced by local inflammatory reactions induced by mitogens; Gram-negative 
bacterial lipopolysaccharide (LPS), concanavalin A (Con A) and 
phytohemagglutinin (PHA).
Mice received injections, beneath the footpad or 
subcutaneously in the flank, of cells of syngeneic chemically induced 
fibrosarcomas with or without varying doses of mitogen.
In the footpad (a) LPS 
caused a dose-dependent increase in the size; (b) Con A caused a decrease in the 
size of one of the three tumors, the decrease being inversely related to the 
dose of Con A; (c) PHA caused a dose-dependent decrease in the size of all three 
tumors: (d) PHA caused much smaller macroscopic inflammatory reactions than LPS 
or Con A. Subcutaneously injected tumor growth was inhibited by all three 
agents.
Subcutaneous tumors contained a higher proportion of host inflammatory 
cells when mitogens had been mixed with the tumor inoculum.
It is concluded that 
mitogens that can induce inflammatory reactions in mice can also bring about 
some suppression of tumor growth but that the depression is site-dependent and 
not clearly related to the apparent intensity of inflammation.
PMCID: PMC1903750
PMID: 7258299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
<i>Iso-S</i>-petasin
 a hypotensive sesquiterpene from <i>Petasites formosanus</i>, depresses cardiac contraction and intracellular Ca2+ transients in adult rat ventricular myocytes <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>Petasites formosanus is an indigenous species of the medicinal plant Petasites which has been used to treat hypertension.
Both S-petasin and its isoform iso-S-petasin have been shown to be the effective ingredients in P. formosanus.
However, their effect on heart function has not been revealed.
This study was to examine the effect of iso-S-petasin on cardiac contractile function at the myocyte level.
Ventricular myocytes were isolated from adult rat hearts and were stimulated to contract at 0.5 Hz under 1.0 mm extracellular Ca2+.
Contractile properties were evaluated using an lonOptix MyoCam system including peak shortening (PS), time to PS (TPS), time to 90% re-lengthening (TR90) and maximal velocity of shortening/re-lengthening (±dL/dt).
Intracellular Ca2+ properties were assessed by fura-2 and presented as Ca2+-induced Ca2+ release (CICR) and intracellular Ca2+ decay.
Acute application of iso-S-petasin (10−7 to 10−4 M) elicited a concentration-dependent inhibition in PS and CICR, with maximal inhibitions of 51.0% and 31.0%, respectively.
iso-S-petasin also induced a concentration-dependent inhibition of ± dL/dt without affecting TPS, TR90, baseline intracellular Ca2+ level or intracellular Ca2+ decay.
Elevation of extracellular Ca2+ from 1.0 mm to 2.7 mm significantly antagonized the iso-S-petasin-induced depression in PS and CICR.
These results demonstrated a direct depressant action of iso-S-petasin on ventricular contraction, which may work in concert with its antihypertensive action to reduce the cardiac load.
The iso-S-petasin-induced decrease in CICR may play a role in its cardiac depressant effect.</jats:p>
Paradoxical Hormonal and Behavioral Responses to Hypothyroid and Hyperthyroid States in the Wistar–Kyoto Rat 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2001 Jun;24(6):632-9. doi: 
10.1016/S0893-133X(00)00229-3.

Paradoxical hormonal and behavioral responses to hypothyroid and hyperthyroid 
states in the Wistar-Kyoto rat.

Redei EE(1)
 Solberg LC, Kluczynski JM, Pare WP.
Author information:
(1)The Asher Center, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Northwestern University Medical School, Chicago, IL 60611, USA.
e-redei@northwestern.edu

Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats show endogenous depressive behavior that can be reversed 
by antidepressants.
Given that WKYs exhibit decreased sensitivity to some 
antidepressants and treatment-resistant depressed patients often show 
hypothalamic-pituitary-thyroid (HPT) dysregulation, we examined the behavioral 
and HPT hormonal responses of WKYs to altered thyroid status.
"Euthyroid" WKYs 
had elevated basal plasma TSH and T(3) levels as compared to Wistars.
Hypothyroidism increased TSH levels more in WKYs than in Wistars and increased 
response latency in the open field test (OFT) of WKYs only.
Administration of 
T(4) and T(3) suppressed plasma TSH equally in both strains.
Wistars responded 
to increased T(3) levels with decreased response latency and increased activity 
in the OFT, but increased immobility in the forced swim test.
In contrast, WKYs 
responded only to the high T(3) levels with decreased response latency in the 
OFT.
These results suggest the existence of a decreased central nervous system 
sensitivity to thyroid hormones in WKYs that could be related to their 
depressive behavior.
DOI: 10.1016/S0893-133X(00)00229-3
PMID: 11331143 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Tolerance to diazepam-induced avoidance depression in mice. 1. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm. 1987 Jan-Feb;39(1):75-9.

Tolerance to diazepam-induced avoidance depression in mice.

Sansone M(1)
 Renzi P, Vetulani J.
Author information:
(1)Istituto di Psicobiologia e Psicofarmacologia, CNR, Roma, Italy.
The disrupting action on avoidance responses, exerted by diazepam given during 
shuttle-box training (5 mg/kg before each session), was abolished by a 
pretreatment with the drug (5 mg/kg) for five days.
Similarly, avoidance 
depression, produced by diazepam in trained mice, was prevented by a 
pretreatment with five daily doses and was attenuated by previous administration 
of three daily injections or even of a single dose of the drug.
The results 
demonstrate that tolerance rapidly develops to diazepam-induced avoidance 
depression, as to other behavioral actions of benzodiazepines.
PMID: 3671188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Anti-stress effect of dalargin in immobilization stress in rats]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1991 Jun;111(6):617-9.

[Anti-stress effect of dalargin in immobilization stress in rats].

[Article in Russian]

Dvortsin GF
 Shatalov VN.
The function of the isolated perfused rat hearts was studied in four groups of 
experiments.
Group 1--included the hearts of intact animals ("absolute 
control"), group 2--the hearts of rats subjected to 24 hour immobilization in 
supine position against the background of triple intramuscular injections of 
placebo (control), group 3 included the hearts of rats, which during 24 hour 
immobilization stress were thrice injected a synthetic analogue of endogenous 
opioids Dalargin in a dose of 3 g/kg, and group 4 included the hearts of 
animals, which during immobilization were administered Dalargin in a dose of 10 
g/kg of body mass.
Ulcer index as indicator of stress injury of gastric mucosa 
was also determined.
In the control group of experiments (group 2) 24 hour 
immobilization stress resulted in complete depression of cardiac performance as 
compared with group 1, and ulcer index approximated 1.
In group 3 the indices of 
cardiac performance even exceeded those in group 1 (intact animals).
As compared 
with group 2, ulcer index in group 3 decreased by 9 times.
In application of 
Dalargin in a dose of 10 g/kg complete preservation of heart function indices 
and complete prevention of stress injury of gastric mucosa were also observed.
Thus, Dalargin possesses cardioprotective and anti-ulcerogenic effect in 
immobilization stress in rats.
Most probably, this phenomenon can be attributed 
to its ability to inhibit the activity of sympathoadrenal system, which gets 
enhanced during stress.
PMID: 1893187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The pharmacokinetics of clomipramine and desmethylclomipramine in dogs: parameter estimates following a single oral dose and 28 consecutive daily oral doses of clomipramine <jats:p>Clomipramine is a tricyclic antidepressant that has been recommended for the treatment of canine compulsive disorder. The pharmacokinetics of clomipramine in dogs have not been reported. This study describes the pharmacokinetics of clomipramine and its active metabolite
 desmethylclomipramine, in six male dogs.
Serial blood samples were collected following both a single oral dose of clomipramine (3 mg/kg) and 28 consecutive daily oral doses (3 mg/kg q 24 h).
In addition, ‘peak’ and ‘trough’ samples were taken throughout the 28‐day dosing period.
Plasma was assayed for total (free and protein‐bound) clomipramine and desmethylclomipramine, using gas‐chromatography with mass spectrometric detection.
Various pharmacokinetic parameters were then determined.
Following a single dose of clomipramine, time of maximum plasma concentration (<jats:italic>t</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub>) of clomipramine was 0.75–3.1 h, maximum plasma concentration (<jats:italic>C</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub>) was 16–310 ng/mL and elimination half‐life (<jats:italic>t</jats:italic><jats:sub>1/2el</jats:sub>) was 1.2–16 h;<jats:italic>t</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub>of desmethylclomipramine was 1.4–8.8 h,<jats:italic>C</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub>was 21–134 ng/mL and<jats:italic>t</jats:italic><jats:sub>1/2el</jats:sub>was 1.2–2.3 h. Following multiple dosing, there was a numeric increase in these parameters;<jats:italic>t</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub>of clomipramine was 3–8 h,<jats:italic>C</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub>was 43–222 ng/mL and<jats:italic>t</jats:italic><jats:sub>1/2el</jats:sub>was 1.2–16 h;<jats:italic>t</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub>of desmethylclomipramine was 1.4–8.8 h,<jats:italic>C</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub>was 21–134 ng/mL and<jats:italic>t</jats:italic><jats:sub>1/2el</jats:sub>was 1.2–2.3 h. Clinically significant differences between dogs and humans in the pharmacokinetics of oral clomipramine are discussed.</jats:p>
Influence of glyceryl trinitrate on force of contraction and action potential of guinea-pig myocardium 1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1975;287(4):329-47. doi: 
10.1007/BF00500036.

Influence of glyceryl trinitrate on force of contraction and action potential of 
guinea-pig myocardium.

Korth M.

1. The inotropic effect of glyceryl trinitrate (GTN) was studied in guinea-pig 
papillary muscles and atrial strips by analysing the isometric contraction curve 
and the monophasic action potential (AP). 2. GTN
 7X10(-5)M in papillary muscles 
and at 1.4x10(-4)M in atrial strips.
The maximum of the contractile force was 
reached in both preparations at 2x10(-4)M GTN.
Positive inotropic effects were 
transitory (3--5 min) and were followed by marked negative inotropic effects.
3.
In the presence of GTN, only 15 of 26 papillary muscles showed a positive 
inotropic response and there was a great variance in its intensity.
Prior 
exposure of papillary muscles to a low GTN concentration, which by itself 
reduced force of contraction (like every single GTN application), was the 
prereqch by itself reduced force of contraction (like every single GTN 
application), was the prerequisite for the positive inotropic effect of a 
subsequent higher GTN concentration.
In atrial strips the positive inotropic 
action was consistent and uniform.
The maximum force of contraction in response 
to single applications of GTN was only about 50% of that in response to 
cumulatively increased GTN concentrations.
4.
In the presence of 5x10(-4)M GTN, 
the tyramine concentration-effect curve was shifted to the left (by one log unit 
at the ED50 level).
5.
Beta-Adrenoceptor blockade by(+/-)-propranolol 
(5x10(-6)M) or noradrenaline depletion by pretreatment of the animals with 
reserpine (5 mg/kg, 18--22 hrs prior to the experiment)prevented the positive 
inotropic effects of GTN in both preparations.
Hence, the GTN-induced increase 
in contractile force is induced by the liberation of noradrenaline and an 
inhibitory effect on the monoamine oxidase (MAO) of sympathetic nerve endings 
might be involved.
6.
In atrial preparations exposed to 5x10(-4)M GTN, time to 
peak force (tu) and relaxation time(t2) were shortened by 12% and 33%, 
respectively.
Pretreatment of the animals with reserpine prevented the 
shortening og t1 and changed the shortening of t2 from 33% to 19%.
7.
In 
papillary muscles, 5x10(-4) M GTN shortened t1 by 10%, while t2 was prolonged by 
17% in noradrenaline-depleted, and by 36% in control muscles.
Prolongation of t2 
at 5x10(-4)M GTN was accompanied by an increase in the duration of the 
monophasic action patential (AP) in reserpine-pretreated as well as in control 
muscles by 12% and 26%, respectively (measured at 90% repolarization).
The same 
GTN concentration slowed the maximum rate of depolarisiation by 32%.
After 35 
min the AP returned to approximately the control value.
In the presence of 
5x10(-4) M GTN, noradrenalin (1x10(-5)M) lengthened the AP by 38% in both, 
control muscles and noradrenaline-depleted preparations.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00500036
PMID: 806816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Spontaneous and Amphetamine‐Evoked Release of Cerebellar Noradrenaline After Sensorimotor Cortex Contusion: An In Vivo Microdialysis Study in the Awake Rat <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> Microdialysis sampling combined with HPLC was used to assess spontaneous and <jats:italic>d</jats:italic>‐amphetamine (AMPH)‐evoked release of noradrenaline (NA) in the cerebellum 1 day after probe implantation and 1 day after contusion of the right sensorimotor cortex (SMCX) in rats. In normal controls the mean β SEM basal NA release was 10.08 β 0.97 pg in the left cerebellar hemisphere and 8.21 β 1.17 pg in the right hemisphere 22–24 h after probe implantation. The average β SEM NA release in a 3‐h period after administration of AMPH (2 mg/kg
 i.p.)
increased to 453 β 47.35 pg in the left and to 402 β 49.95 pg in the right cerebellar hemisphere.
NA release (range of 413–951% increase over baseline) was maximal 20–40 min postdrug, returned to basal levels within 5 h, and remained unchanged for the 22–24‐h postdrug measurement period.
Animals with a focal SMCX contusion had a marked depression of both spontaneous and AMPH‐evoked NA release.
Mean β SEM basal NA release was 4.84 β 1.09 pg in the left and 4.95 β 0.43 pg in the right cerebellar hemisphere from 22 to 24 h postinjury, with NA levels increasing to 259 β 75.44 and 219 β 23.45 pg in the respective hemispheres over a 3‐h period after AMPH.
The maximal AMPH‐induced increase in NA release ranged from 522 to 1,088% of basal levels in contused rats, with NA release returning to predrug levels within 5 h and remaining depressed for at least 48 h postinjury.
These data indicate that although neocortical injury results in a bilateral reduction of extracellular levels of NA in cerebellum, AMPH‐releasable NA stores are present in the cerebellum.
These effects may be related to locomotor impairments and AMPH‐facilitated behavioral” recovery after cortical injury.</jats:p>
Too Much to Bear <jats:p>Abstract. Background: People who feel they have become a burden on others may become susceptible to suicidal ideation. When people no longer feel capable or productive
 they may assume that friends and family members would be better off without them.
Aim: The present study was designed to assess preliminary psychometric properties of a new measure, the Perceived Burdensomeness (PBS) Scale.
Method: Depressed psychiatric patients (N = 173) were recruited from a veterans affairs medical center.
Patients were assessed with a structured diagnostic interview and self-report measures assessing perceived burdensomeness, depression severity, hopelessness, and suicidal ideation.
Results: The present study supported preliminary evidence of reliability and concurrent validity of the PBS.
Additionally, perceived burdensomeness was significantly associated with higher levels of hopelessness and suicidal ideation.
Conclusion: It is hoped that with the aid of the PBS clinicians may be able to intervene more specifically in the treatment of suicidality.</jats:p>
[Antimicrobial properties of hexamethylene diamine and piperidine derivatives]. 1. Mikrobiol Zh. 1978 Jan-Feb;40(1):76-9.

[Antimicrobial properties of hexamethylene diamine and piperidine derivatives].

[Article in Russian]

Kharchenko SN
 Litvin VP, Pis'ko GT.
PMID: 634174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Development and Validation of the Behavioral Avoidance Test—Back Pain (BAT-Back) for Patients With Chronic Low Back Pain <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Objectives:</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Pain-related fear and avoidance of physical activities are central elements of the fear-avoidance model of musculoskeletal pain. Pain-related fear has typically been measured by self-report instruments. In this study
 we developed and validated a Behavioral Avoidance Test (BAT) for chronic low back pain (CLBP) patients with the aim of assessing pain-related avoidance behavior by direct observation.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Materials and Methods:</jats:title>
            <jats:p>The BAT-Back was administered to a group of CLBP patients (N=97) and pain-free controls (N=31).
Furthermore, pain, pain-related fear, disability, catastrophizing, and avoidance behavior were measured using self-report instruments.
Reliability was assessed with intraclass correlation coefficient and Cronbach α. Validity was assessed by examining correlation and regression analysis.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Results:</jats:title>
            <jats:p>The intraclass correlation coefficient for the BAT-Back avoidance score was <jats:italic toggle="yes">r</jats:italic>=0.76.
Internal consistency was α=0.95.
CLBP patients and controls differed significantly on BAT-Back avoidance scores as well as self-report measures.
BAT-Back avoidance scores were significantly correlated with scores on each of the self-report measures (<jats:italic toggle="yes">r</jats:italic>s=0.27 to 0.54).
They were not significantly correlated with general anxiety and depression, age, body mass index, and pain duration.
The BAT-Back avoidance score was able to capture unique variance in disability after controlling for other variables (eg, pain intensity and pain-related fear).</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Discussion:</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Results indicate that the BAT-Back is a reliable and valid measure of pain-related avoidance behavior.
It may be useful for clinicians in tailoring treatments for chronic pain as well as an outcome measure for exposure treatments.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
Environmental Enrichment Increases Paired-Pulse Depression in Rat Auditory Cortex <jats:p> Temporal features are important for the identification of natural sounds. Earlier studies have shown that cortical processing of temporal information can be altered by long-term experience with modulated sounds. In a previous study
 we observed that environmental enrichment dramatically increased the response of cortical neurons to single tone and noise burst stimuli in both awake and anesthetized rats.
Here, we evaluate how enrichment influences temporal information processing in the auditory cortex.
We recorded responses to repeated tones and noise bursts in awake rats using epidural evoked potentials and in anesthetized rats using microelectrodes.
Enrichment increased the response of cortical neurons to stimuli presented at slow rates and decreased the response to stimuli presented at fast rates relative to controls.
Our observation that enrichment substantially increased response strength and forward masking is consistent with earlier reports that long-term potentiation of cortical synapses is associated with increased paired-pulse depression.
Enrichment also increased response synchronization at slow rates and decreased synchronization at fast rates.
Paired-pulse depression increased within days of environmental enrichment and was restored to normal levels after return to standard housing conditions.
These results are relevant to several clinical disorders characterized by abnormal gating of sensory information, including autism, schizophrenia, and dyslexia.
</jats:p>
Effects of excretory/secretory products from Anisakis simplex (Nematoda) on immune gene expression in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) 1. Fish Shellfish Immunol. 2013 Sep;35(3):734-9. doi: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.06.007. 
Epub 2013 Jun 12.

Effects of excretory/secretory products from Anisakis simplex (Nematoda) on 
immune gene expression in rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss).

Bahlool QZ(1)
 Skovgaard A, Kania PW, Buchmann K.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Aquatic Pathobiology, Department of Veterinary Disease Biology, 
Faculty of Health and Medical Sciences, University of Copenhagen, Frederiksberg 
C, Denmark.
qusay@life.ku.dk

Excretory/secretory (ES) products are molecules produced by parasitic nematodes, 
including larval Anisakis simplex, a parasite occurring in numerous marine fish 
hosts.
The effects of these substances on host physiology have not been fully 
described.
The present work elucidates the influence of ES substances on the 
fish immune system by measuring immune gene expression in spleen and liver of 
rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss) injected intraperitoneally with ES products 
isolated from A. simplex third stage larvae.
The overall gene expression profile 
of exposed fish showed a generalized down-regulation of the immune genes tested, 
suggesting a role of ES proteins in immunomodulation.
We also tested the 
enzymatic activity of the ES proteins and found that lipase, esterase/lipase, 
valine and cysteine arylamidases, naphthol-AS-BI-phosphohydrolase and 
α-galactosidase activities were present in the ES solution.
This type of 
hydrolytic enzyme activity may play a role in nematode penetration of host 
tissue.
In addition, based on the notion that A. simplex ES products may have an 
immune-depressive effect (by minimizing immune gene expression) it could also be 
suggested that worm enzymes directly target host immune molecules which would 
add to a decreased host immune response and increased worm survival.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.fsi.2013.06.007
PMID: 23769875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sufentanil-induced respiratory depression in dogs. 1. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1990;328:393-6.

Sufentanil-induced respiratory depression in dogs.

Tadoori P(1)
 Ravella R, Silverstein JH, Gintautas J, Abadir AR.
Author information:
(1)Brookdale Hospital Medical Center, Brooklyn, New York 11212.
PMID: 1968269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dust from hog confinement facilities impairs Ca<sup>2+</sup>mobilization from sarco(endo)plasmic reticulum by inhibiting ryanodine receptors <jats:p>Individuals working in commercial hog confinement facilities have elevated incidences of headaches
 depression, nausea, skeletal muscle weakness, fatigue, gastrointestinal disorders, and cardiovascular diseases, and the molecular mechanisms for these nonrespiratory ailments remain incompletely undefined.
A common element underlying these diverse pathophysiologies is perturbation of intracellular Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>homeostasis.
This study assessed whether the dust generated inside hog confinement facilities contains compounds that alter Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>mobilization via ryanodine receptors (RyRs), key intracellular channels responsible for mobilizing Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>from internal stores to elicit an array of physiologic functions.
Hog barn dust (HBD) was extracted with phosphate-buffered saline, sterile-filtered (0.22 μm), and size-separated using Sephadex G-100 resin.
Fractions (F) 1 through 9 (M<jats:sub>w</jats:sub>&gt;10,000 Da) had no measurable effects on RyR isoforms.
However, F10 through F17, which contained compounds of M<jats:sub>w</jats:sub>≤2,000 Da, modulated the [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]ryanodine binding to RyR1, RyR2, and RyR3 in a biphasic (Gaussian) manner.
The K<jats:sub>i</jats:sub>values for F13, the most potent fraction, were 3.8 ± 0.2 μg/ml for RyR1, 0.2 ± 0.01 μg/ml and 19.1 ± 2.8 μg/ml for RyR2 (two binding sites), and 44.9 ± 2.8 μg/ml and 501.6 ± 9.2 μg/ml for RyR3 (two binding sites).
In lipid bilayer assays, F13 dose-dependently decreased the open probabilities of RyR1, RyR2, and RyR3.
Pretreating differentiated mouse skeletal myotubes (C2C12 cells) with F13 blunted the amplitudes of ryanodine- and K<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>-induced Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>transients.
Because RyRs are present in many cell types, impairment in Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>mobilization from internal stores via these channels is a possible mechanism by which HBD may trigger these seemingly unrelated pathophysiologies.</jats:p>
Post-train depression of ganglionic transmission in the presence of d-amphetamine. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1992 Sep-Oct;319:76-85.

Post-train depression of ganglionic transmission in the presence of 
d-amphetamine.

Christ D(1).

Author information:
(1)South Bend Center for Medical Education
 Indiana University School of 
Medicine, Notre Dame, IN 46556.
Repetitive stimulation (30 Hz, 20 sec) of the preganglionic nerve to the hamster 
isolated stellate ganglion in a control solution had only small effects on the 
compound action potentials of the postganglionic nerve (0.2 Hz) after the train.
When 10(-5) M d-amphetamine was added to the superfusing solution, the 
repetitive stimulation induced a post-train depression of the postganglionic 
compound action potential.
The mean reduction of the compound action potential 
during the post-train depression in d-amphetamine was 37 +/- 15% and the 
duration was from 60 to 120 sec.
Post-train depression only occurred after long 
conditioning trains and was never observed with less than 100 stimuli in the 
conditioning train.
A post-train depression (45 +/- 8%) was also observed in the 
presence of 10(-5) M cocaine.
The post-train depression in d-amphetamine was 
significantly reduced by the alpha-adrenoceptor antagonist, phentolamine (10(-5) 
M) and by the alpha 2-adrenoceptor antagonist, yohimbine (10(-6) M), but not by 
the alpha 1-adrenoceptor antagonist, prazosin (10(-5) M).
There was no 
post-train depression in the presence of d-amphetamine in ganglia from five 
hamsters that were pretreated with reserpine (6 mg/kg, i.p., 4 hr).
Atropine 
(10(-6) M) increased and prolonged the post-train depression in the presence of 
d-amphetamine.
These results indicate that repetitive stimulation in the 
presence of d-amphetamine leads to a post-train depression of the postganglionic 
compound action potential that is mediated by an action of endogenous 
catecholamines at alpha 2-adrenoceptors.
Muscarinic cholinoceptors do not appear 
to be involved in the generation of the post-train depression.
PMID: 1337426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of SUN 1165
 a New Potent Antiarrhythmic Agent, on the Kinetics of Rate-Dependent Block of Na Channels and Ventricular Conduction of Extrasystoles 1.
J Cardiovasc Pharmacol.
1988 Apr;11(4):407-12. doi: 
10.1097/00005344-198804000-00005.
Effect of SUN 1165, a new potent antiarrhythmic agent, on the kinetics of 
rate-dependent block of Na channels and ventricular conduction of extrasystoles.
Hattori Y(1), Hidaka T, Aisaka K, Satoh F, Ishihara T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Experimental Pharmacology, Suntory Institute for Biomedical 
Research, Osaka, Japan.
Effects of SUN 1165, disopyramide, lorcainide, and mexiletine were studied 
either on the kinetics of onset of and recovery from rate-dependent depression 
of maximum rate of rise of phase 0 action potential (Vmax) in isolated guinea 
pig papillary muscles using standard microelectrode techniques or on 
intraventricular conduction time of extrasystoles evoked at varied coupling 
intervals in anesthetized dogs.
SUN 1165 and lorcainide produced a 
slow-developing rate-dependent block of Vmax with the rate constant of 0.12 AP-1 
and 0.09 AP-1, respectively.
Mexiletine also produced a rate-dependent block of 
Vmax, but with very rapid onset so as not to be fitted by a single exponential 
curve.
Disopyramide produced an intermediate rate-dependent block of Vmax with 
the rate constant of 0.46 AP-1.
The time constants for recovery from the 
rate-dependent block for SUN 1165, lorcainide and disopyramide were 27.3-28.2, 
23.2, and 17.0 s, respectively, while that for mexiletine was 0.118 s. SUN 1165, 
lorcainide, and disopyramide slowed ventricular conduction time of extrasystoles 
at all coupling intervals of 800-250 ms. On the other hand, mexiletine slowed 
conduction time at short coupling intervals of 500-250 ms.
These findings 
suggest that, like lorcainide, SUN 1165 belongs to class Ic antiarrhythmic 
agents, and that SUN 1165 and lorcainide as well as disopyramide with slow and 
intermediate kinetics and mexiletine with fast kinetics may inhibit ventricular 
extrasystoles conducted at long and short range of coupling intervals, 
respectively.
DOI: 10.1097/00005344-198804000-00005
PMID: 2453743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dopamine D2-like receptor activation antagonizes long-term depression of orofacial sensorimotor processing in anesthetized mice 1. Brain Res. 2005 Feb 21;1035(1):94-9. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.12.023.

Dopamine D2-like receptor activation antagonizes long-term depression of 
orofacial sensorimotor processing in anesthetized mice.

Ellrich J(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery
 Experimental Neurosurgery, University Hospital 
Aachen, Pauwelsstrasse 30, D-52074 Aachen, Germany.
jellrich@ukaachen.de

Long-term depression (LTD) of orofacial sensorimotor processing recently has 
been demonstrated in anesthetized mice.
Due to the remarkable role of dopamine 
in central nervous system LTD, the influence of dopamine D2 receptor activation 
on LTD of the jaw-opening reflex (JOR) was investigated.
Electric low-frequency 
stimulation (LFS, 1 Hz) of the tongue suppressed the JOR integral by 43% for at 
least 1 h. After systemic administration of the dopamine D2-like receptor 
agonist quinpirole, LTD was significantly attenuated to 14%.
JOR decreased for 
only about 15 min after LFS according to a short-term depression.
Under systemic 
application of the dopamine D2-like receptor antagonist sulpiride, LTD 
significantly increased to 64%, again for at least 1 h. Thus, D2-like receptor 
activation prevented LTD, and D2-like receptor blockade amplified LTD of the 
reflex.
The time course of inhibition may be due to a dopaminergic D2-like 
receptor mechanism that antagonizes the transfer from short-term into long-term 
depression.
Considering a putative mediation of LTD by the endogenous pain 
control system, the results correspond to the known inhibitory control of this 
system by a D2-like receptor mechanism.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.12.023
PMID: 15713281 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A two-state model for the 5-HT2 receptor: effects of alpha-adrenoceptor ligands. 1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1988;11 Suppl 1:S88-92.

A two-state model for the 5-HT2 receptor: effects of alpha-adrenoceptor ligands.

Kaumann AJ(1).

Author information:
(1)ICI Pharmaceuticals Division
 Mereside, Macclesfield, Cheshire, U.K.
The mode of interaction of some alpha-adrenoceptor ligands with the 
5-HT2-receptor system was investigated in the calf coronary artery.
Isometric 
contractions caused by 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) were studied on strips without 
endothelium.
Phentolamine antagonized competitively (pKB = 7.4) the effects of 
5-HT.
Phentolamine also prevented the methysergide-induced depression of 
contractions elicited by 5-HT.
The alpha 1-selective ligand 127I-HEAT depressed 
the responses to 5-HT.
Both phentolamine and ketanserin prevented the depressant 
effects of I-HEAT on 5-HT-induced contractions.
These and previous experiments 
are consistent with the existence of the 5-HT2 receptor in two interconvertible 
states R in equilibrium with R'.
Interconversions between the high affinity 
state R and low affinity state R' (for 5-HT) appear to be modulated by an 
allosteric site A.
The present and previous data suggest four possible modes of 
interaction of alpha-adrenoceptor ligands with the 5-HT2-receptor system: (a) 
ligands that compete with 5-HT for the 5-HT2 receptor in the R state (examples 
are nonselective phentolamine, alpha 1-selective ketanserin and corynanthine, 
and alpha 2-selective yohimbine and rauwolscine); (b) ligands such as I-HEAT 
that through binding to A depress the response to 5-HT by favouring the R' 
state; (c) ligands, such as ketanserin and phentolamine, that through binding to 
A favour the R state; and (d) ligands, such as phenoxybenzamine, that cause a 
covalent modification of the R state but not of the R' state.
Qualitative and 
quantitative considerations suggest that in the calf coronary artery the 
described features are unrelated to alpha 1- and alpha 2-adrenoceptors.
PMID: 2459522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Synaptic dynamics and long-term plasticity at synapses of Purkinje cells onto neighboring Purkinje cells of a mormyrid fish: A dual cell recording study 1. Neuroscience. 2012 Dec 6;225:199-212. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.08.020.
 Epub 2012 Aug 18.

Synaptic dynamics and long-term plasticity at synapses of Purkinje cells onto 
neighboring Purkinje cells of a mormyrid fish: a dual cell recording study.

Zhang Y(1)
 Magnus G, Han VZ.
Author information:
(1)Center for Integrative Brain Research, Seattle Children's Research Institute, 
Seattle, WA 98101, USA.
ypzhang@fmmu.edu.cn

The input synapses of cerebellar Purkinje cells (PCs) have been extensively 
studied and much has been learned about their dynamics, plasticity and 
functionality.
In contrast there is limited information available about PC 
output synapses.
This study uses dual cell recording methods to investigate 
synaptic dynamics and plasticity at individual PC synapses onto neighboring PCs 
in in vitro preparations of the mormyrid cerebellum.
This synaptic connectivity 
may be strong or weak.
For strong connections, inhibitory postsynaptic 
potentials (IPSPs) or currents (IPSCs) are synchronized with the action 
potentials of the presynaptic cell.
For weak connections, however, the pre- and 
postsynaptic potentials are no longer synchronized, and presynaptic burst firing 
at intraburst rates of ∼50 Hz or higher is required to reliably induce the 
postsynaptic inhibition.
A depression of this postsynaptic inhibition was 
observed for both types of connectivity following repeated presynaptic bursts, 
which was subsequently largely reversed following pairings of the presynaptic 
burst-induced IPSPs/IPSCs with evoked burst firing of the postsynaptic cell.
Moreover, the original postsynaptic depression was found to be either augmented 
or reversed depending on the temporal order of each pair of additional pre- and 
postsynaptic cell activations, hence demonstrating a reversible and spike 
timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) at this synapse.
Copyright © 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.08.020
PMID: 22906478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Impaired Long-Term Potentiation in the Prefrontal Cortex of Huntington’s Disease Mouse Models: Rescue by D&lt;sub&gt;1&lt;/sub&gt; Dopamine Receptor Activation <jats:p>&lt;i&gt;Background:&lt;/i&gt; The introduction of gene testing for Huntington’s disease (HD) has enabled the neuropsychiatric and cognitive profiling of human gene carriers prior to the onset of overt motor and cognitive symptoms. Such studies reveal an early decline in working memory and executive function
 altered EEG and a loss of striatal dopamine receptors.
Working memory is processed in the prefrontal cortex and modulated by extrinsic dopaminergic inputs.
&lt;i&gt;Objective:&lt;/i&gt; We sought to study excitatory synaptic function and plasticity in the medial prefrontal cortex of mouse models of HD.
&lt;i&gt;Methods:&lt;/i&gt; We have used 2 mouse models of HD, carrying 89 and 116 CAG repeats (corresponding to a preclinical and symptomatic state, respectively) and performed electrophysiological field recording in coronal slices of the medial prefrontal cortex.
&lt;i&gt;Results:&lt;/i&gt; We report that short-term synaptic plasticity and long-term potentiation (LTP) are impaired and that the severity of impairment is correlated with the size of the CAG repeat.
Remarkably, the deficits in LTP and short-term plasticity are reversed in the presence of a D&lt;sub&gt;1&lt;/sub&gt; dopamine receptor agonist (SKF38393).
&lt;i&gt;Conclusion:&lt;/i&gt; In a previous study, we demonstrated that a deficit in long-term depression (LTD) in the perirhinal cortex could also be reversed by a dopamine agonist.
These and our current data indicate that inadequate dopaminergic modulation of cortical synaptic function is an early event in HD and may provide a route for the alleviation of cognitive dysfunction.</jats:p>
Long lasting inhibition of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) transport in sensory nerves induced by capsaicin pretreatment of the receptive field 1. Brain Res. 1984 Apr 23;298(1):45-9. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(84)91145-4.

Long lasting inhibition of horseradish peroxidase (HRP) transport in sensory 
nerves induced by capsaicin pretreatment of the receptive field.

Taylor DC
 Pierau FK, Szolcsányi J.

Capsaicin, when injected into the scrotal skin of adult rats was seen to produce 
a long-lasting desensitization.
To investigate the possible effect of this 
treatment on the sensory neurones of the pudendal nerve, rats were injected with 
horseradish peroxidase (HRP) at different time intervals following pretreatment 
with capsaicin.
The HRP was applied in two different ways.
In one group of rats 
HRP was injected into both sides of the scrotal skin between 2 and 12 days after 
capsaicin pretreatment of one side of the scrotal skin.
More HRP labelled 
neurones were seen in the S1 and L6 dorsal root ganglia (DRG) on the non-treated 
side than on the pretreated side.
Similar results were obtained when the HRP was 
injected directly into the pudendal nerve.
A marked decrease in the number of 
HRP labelled neurones on the pretreated side was observed even when HRP was 
injected into the nerve up to 1 year after the capsaicin pretreatment.
It 
appears therefore that at least part of the effect of capsaicin on peripheral 
sensory neurones is due to an effect of capsaicin on the axoplasmic transport 
processes, and that this effect is long lasting.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(84)91145-4
PMID: 6202366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Afterimage-like effects in the motion-sensitive neuron H1 <jats:p>
            A powerful effect resembling an afterimage is demonstrated on the pathway to the motion-sensitive neuron H1. This effect is independent of the locally generated gain control described in an earlier paper (Maddess &amp; Laughlin 1985

            <jats:italic>Proc.
R. Soc.
Lond</jats:italic>
            .
B 225, 251).
The afterimage, produced across the eye by a stationary pattern, causes the sensitivity to movement to be different according to the local stimulus history, and the effects of low-contrast (0.1) patterns, presented for as little as a few hundred milliseconds, remain for up to 2 s. Moving patterns interact with the afterimage to modulate the spike rate of H1.
The afterimage increases with contrast but saturates at contrasts above 0.5.
Low spatial frequencies generate afterimages less effectively than moderate ones; this result indicates that the afterimage process could lie at, or after, lateral inhibition between tonic units.
This is supported by the fact that the altered sensitivity profiles generated by single bright and dark vertical bars initially resemble Mach bands.
However, this character alters as the afterimage decays, and the depression of H1’s response to moving bright stimuli, produced by the afterimage of a dark bar, continues to grow for up to 1 s after the adapting bar is removed.
A short-lived (0.5 s) reduction of H1’s directional selectivity accompanies strong afterimage formation.
All these factors, especially the saturation at low contrasts and the spatial frequency tuning, rule out light adaptation by photoreceptors as the afterimage source.
Luminances used were also low enough to exclude influence by the pupil mechanism.
Lastly, responses to patterns that are occasionally jumped by large or small distances are broadened by stimuli that produce an afterimage.
Responses to small displacements have previously been described as ‘velocity impulse responses’ (Srinivasan 1983,
            <jats:italic>Vision Res</jats:italic>
            .
23, 659; Zaagman
            <jats:italic>et al</jats:italic>
            .
1983,
            <jats:italic>IEEE Trans.
SMC</jats:italic>
            13, 900) and so the response broadening (stimulus blurring) can be taken as a reduction of the fly’s temporal resolution of moving objects.
Previously reported work shows that afterimages seen in humans and the effect reported here act over the same range of temporal frequencies rather than retinal drift speeds.
This may suggest an important role for afterimage-like effects in the processing of the low temporal frequency components of moving images.
Certainly, the fly’s afterimage system reduces the visibility of moving objects within patches of an image that, have on average, contained slowly varying motion signals.
Given that H1 is a motion-sensitive neuron, detailed knowledge of this afterimage-like phenomenon appears to be essential for understanding the spatio-temporal function of H1, and perhaps of similar motion-sensitive neurons.
</jats:p>
A study of inhibitory antagonism in cat visual cortex 1. Brain Res. 1975 Jul 25;93(1):41-62. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(75)90285-1.

A study of inhibitory antagonism in cat visual cortex.

Daniels JD
 Pettigrew JD.
Since there seems to be good evidence that GABA may act as an inhibitory 
neurotransmitter in the mammalian cortex, we tested the effects of an antagonist 
of GABA, namely the alkaloid bicuculine, on the response properties of visual 
cortex neurons, using a computer-controlled stimulus presentation system to 
assess quantitatively the changes in receptive field organization after the 
drug.
Complex cells were most affected, increasing both evoked and spontaneous 
activity and losing some of their specificities for stimulus parameters such as 
orientation and direction.
Hyper-complex cells lost their inhibitory flanks, 
responding equally well to long and short bars after the drug.
Simple cells were 
the least affected, usually becoming somewhat depressed after the drug.
Preliminary tests with another inhibitory amino acid antagonist, strychnine, 
showed that it excited simple cells, indicating that possibly more than one 
inhibitory transmitter is at work in the cortex.
The results are discussed with 
relation to the synaptic anatomy of the cortex, and it is concluded that a class 
of stellate cells, using GABA, is a likely candidate for the transmitter of some 
intracortical inhibition.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(75)90285-1
PMID: 166731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A Metalloporphyrin Antioxidant Alters Cytokine Responses after Irradiation in a Prostate Tumor Model 1. Radiat Res. 2010 Apr;173(4):441-52. doi: 10.1667/RR1765.1.

A metalloporphyrin antioxidant alters cytokine responses after irradiation in a 
prostate tumor model.

Makinde AY(1)
 Rizvi A, Crapo JD, Pearlstein RD, Slater JM, Gridley DS.
Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Sciences and, Radiation Research Laboratories, Loma Linda 
University and Medical Center, Loma Linda, California 92354, USA.
dgridley@dominion.llumc.edu

The goal of this study was to evaluate cytokine secretion capacity in a mouse 
model of prostate cancer, both with and without metalloporphyrin antioxidant and 
radiation treatment.
C57BL/6 mice with subcutaneous RM-9 tumors were treated 
daily for 12 days with MnTE-2-PyP(5+) [Mn (III) tetrakis 
(N-ethylpyridinium-2-yl) porphyrin], beginning 1 day after injection of RM-9 
cells; a 10-Gy tumor-localized dose of (60)Co gamma rays was administered in a 
single fraction on day 7.
Spleen, tumors and plasma were collected on day 12.
T 
cells in the spleen were activated with anti-CD3 antibody and supernatants were 
collected.
Twenty-two cytokines were quantified in spleen supernatants, five in 
tumor homogenates, and three in plasma using multiplex bead array technology and 
ELISA.
The presence of a tumor had significant effects on many of the cytokines 
quantified (P < 0.05).
Tumor-induced depression was evident for eight spleen 
cytokines (TNF-alpha, G-CSF, GM-CSF, IFN-gamma, IL10, IP-10, MIP-1alpha and 
mKC), whereas only three were enhanced (IL1beta, IL6 and MCP-1).
Radiotherapy 
resulted in enhanced splenocyte capacity to produce IL4 and IL13 and increased 
IL4, MCP-1 and VEGF in tumors (P < 0.05).
Addition of MnTE-2-PyP(5+) to 
radiation decreased the concentrations of IL4, IL13 and TGF-beta1 in spleen 
supernatants and IL4 and VEGF in tumors (P < 0.05 compared to radiation alone).
Some differences were also noted in plasma cytokines.
Overall, the findings 
suggest that administration of MnTE-2-PyP(5+) together with radiotherapy may 
enhance anti-tumor immune responsiveness and decrease the risk for 
radiation-induced normal tissue toxicities.
DOI: 10.1667/RR1765.1
PMID: 20334516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Relationship between the growth rate of the liver of young rats and the inhibitory effect of extracts of their liver on the multiplication of cultured cells]. 1. C R Acad Hebd Seances Acad Sci D. 1976 Dec 8;283(15):1642-50.

[Relationship between the growth rate of the liver of young rats and the 
inhibitory effect of extracts of their liver on the multiplication of cultured 
cells].

[Article in French]

Aujard C
 Chany E, Frayssinet C.

We have shown that extracts of liver from young Rats are less active, than 
extracts of liver from adult Rats, in inhibiting the multiplication of cells in 
culture.
This inhibitory activity is at a minimum in livers taken from 10 to 15 
days old Rats, which corresponds to the time of maximum increase in weight of 
the liver.
The existence of an inverse relationship between the inhibitory 
activity of these extracts and the state of proliferation of the liver suggests 
that the inhibitory substance contained in the liver extracts may act as a 
regulator of growth of the organ.
PMID: 827373 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ventilatory responses of dystrophic and control hamsters to naloxone 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1989 Dec;34(4):681-4. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(89)90258-x.

Ventilatory responses of dystrophic and control hamsters to naloxone.

Schlenker EH(1)
 Metz TJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of South Dakota School 
of Medicine, Vermillion 57069.
In this study we determined if endogenous opioid peptides may contribute to the 
depression of ventilation seen in dystrophic hamsters.
Ventilation of control 
and dystrophic awake hamsters was determined prior to either naloxone (1 mg/kg) 
or saline administration and then 5, 15 and 30 minutes postinjection.
Subsequently, animals were exposed to a hypercapnic challenge (7% CO2 in O2).
Control hamsters increased ventilation significantly (p less than 0.01) after 
naloxone compared to saline treatment.
In contrast, dystrophic hamsters showed 
no difference in ventilation when they received either naloxone or saline.
Both 
groups increased ventilation significantly (p less than 0.05) after hypercapnic 
challenge, whether they had received naloxone or saline.
Although dystrophic 
hamsters can respond to a ventilatory stimulant (CO2), naloxone did not increase 
ventilation, possibly indicating that endogenous opioids are not responsible for 
their depressed ventilation.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(89)90258-x
PMID: 2516325 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of dibutyryl cyclic AMP on intracellular levels of avian sarcoma virus specific RNA 1. Nature. 1978 Jul 20;274(5668):274-6. doi: 10.1038/274274a0.

Effect of dibutyryl cyclic AMP on intracellular levels of avian sarcoma virus 
specific RNA.

Guntaka RV
 Weiner AJ.
DOI: 10.1038/274274a0
PMID: 210389 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of skin in the burn-induced reduction of reticuloendothelial phagocytic activity in rats 1. Burns. 1990 Feb;16(1):57-9. doi: 10.1016/0305-4179(90)90207-d.

Role of skin in the burn-induced reduction of reticuloendothelial phagocytic 
activity in rats.

Trop M(1)
 Schiffrin EJ, Carter EA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts General 
Hospital, Boston.
Acute burn trauma has been demonstrated to depress reticuloendothelial system 
(RES) phagocytic activity, which could partially explain the development of 
septicaemia in burn patients.
In the present study we have attempted to 
determine the role that skin plays in the depression of the RES.
One group of 
Lewis rats was subjected to a 100 degrees C scald burn for 10 s. Eschar was then 
removed and implanted onto the backs of a second group of normal controls.
A 
third group of Lewis rats were subjected to sham treatment; the eschar of these 
animals was removed and implanted onto the back of a fourth group of normal 
rats.
The excision sites of the donor animals were immediately covered with 
Biobrane.
Twenty-four hours later the technetium-99m sulphur colloid [( 
99mTS]SC) method described earlier (Trop et al., 1989) was used to determine 
phagocytosis in these four groups of animals.
Acute burn trauma produced a 
marked reduction in colloid uptake by the spleen and a marked increase in the 
uptake of colloid material by the lung, although no effect was observed on liver 
or kidney uptake.
Implantation of the burn eschar into normal control rats had 
no statistically significant effect upon colloid uptake.
These data suggest that 
alterations in phagocytic activity of the spleen and lung occur within minutes 
after burn injury and may be unrelated to the presence of the burn eschar 
itself.
DOI: 10.1016/0305-4179(90)90207-d
PMID: 2322396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
New indolyl peptidyl esters as MAO inhibitors 1. Pharmacol Res Commun. 1982 Oct;14(9):827-37. doi:
10.1016/s0031-6989(82)80007-6.

New indolyl peptidyl esters as MAO inhibitors.

Sharma M
 Gujrati VR, Nath C, Bhargava KP, Shanker K.

DOI: 10.1016/s0031-6989(82)80007-6
PMID: 7178212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of calcium antagonistic drugs on the electrical activity of rabbit sino‐atrial node <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The effects of several calcium antagonistic drugs (slow channel blockers)
 mesudipine, FR‐34235 (nilvadipine), nifedipine, and verapamil, were compared on the naturally‐occurring slow action potentials (APs) of the isolated spontaneously‐contracting sinoatrial (SA)‐node of the rabbit.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Mesudipine, at 1 × 10<jats:sup>−8</jats:sup> M, had little or no effect on the AP parameters and beating frequency.
At 1 × 10<jats:sup>−7</jats:sup> M, mesudipine depressed the amplitude, + V̇<jats:sub>max</jats:sub> and frequency of the APs.
A higher concentration of mesudipine (3 × 10<jats:sup>−7</jats:sup> M) completely blocked the slow APs.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The concentration of FR‐34235 required for 50% depression of V̇<jats:sub>max</jats:sub> was 3 × 10<jats:sup>−8</jats:sup> M, and complete block required 1 × 10<jats:sup>−7</jats:sup> M.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The verapamil and nifedipine concentrations required for complete block were 1 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> M and 1 × 10<jats:sup>−7</jats:sup> M, respectively.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The cells blocked by these drugs were depolarized to about − 40 mV.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Cells blocked and depolarized by the drugs responded to intensive field stimulation with a transient after‐hyperpolarization, followed by damped oscillations.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>When [Ca]<jats:sub>o</jats:sub> was elevated from 1.8 mM to 5.4 mM, full block required a higher concentration of mesudipine (1 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> M) and FR‐34235 (1 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> M).</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The order of potency of the drugs tested was: nifedipine = FR‐34235 &gt; mesudipine &gt; verapamil.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The effects of mesudipine, FR‐34235, and nifedipine were easily reversible upon washout for 10 min, whereas those of verapamil required longer periods.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The results indicate that the slow channel blockers, mesudipine, FR‐34235, nifedipine, and verapamil depress the APs and automaticity of the SA‐node.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Localization of neutrophil adherence-inhibiting factor in guinea pig platelets 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1987 Dec 10;931(3):294-302. doi: 
10.1016/0167-4889(87)90219-9.

Localization of neutrophil adherence-inhibiting factor in guinea pig platelets.

Iwabuchi K(1)
 Yamashita T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Chemistry, School of Medicine, Juntendo 
University, Tokyo, Japan.
The effect of constituents of guinea pig platelets on neutrophil adherence was 
examined.
The platelet sonicate supernatant contained adherence-inhibiting 
activity which strongly inhibited neutrophil adherence to glass.
When the 
platelet sonicate supernatant was treated with neuraminidase or trypsin, the 
adherence-inhibiting activity was significantly inhibited, suggesting that the 
adherence-inhibiting factor (AIF) is a glycoprotein.
The subcellular 
fractionation experiments indicated that the AIF activity was present at about 
40% in both the cytosol and granule fractions.
From the Sephadex G-200 gel 
filtration analysis, AIF of cytosol fraction and granule fraction proved to be 
different molecules, with molecular masses of about 230 and 12 kDa, 
respectively.
When platelets were stimulated with thrombin, about 20% of total 
AIF was released extracellularly without the release of the cytoplasmic enzyme 
lactate dehydrogenase.
These results suggest the possibility that a biologically 
active substance, AIF, is released from platelets in response to stimuli and 
regulates neutrophil functions through interference with neutrophil adherence.
DOI: 10.1016/0167-4889(87)90219-9
PMID: 3676347 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Different Levels of Organic and Inorganic Chromium on Growth Performance and Immunocompetence of Broilers under Heat Stress 1. Biol Trace Elem Res. 2012 Jun;146(3):309-17. doi: 10.1007/s12011-011-9260-1. 
Epub 2011 Nov 30.

Effects of different levels of organic and inorganic chromium on growth 
performance and immunocompetence of broilers under heat stress.

Ghazi Sh(1)
 Habibian M, Moeini MM, Abdolmohammadi AR.
Author information:
(1)Animal Science Department, Razi University, Kermanshah, Iran.
shahabghazi@yahoo.co.uk

This experiment was carried out to investigate the effects of different levels 
of organic and inorganic chromium on the performance, immune function and some 
serum mineral concentrations of broilers under heat stress condition (23.9-37°C 
cycling).
A total of 150 one-day-old broiler chicks according to a completely 
randomized design were assigned into five treatment groups.
Each treatment 
consisted of three replicates and each replicate contained ten chicks.
Chicks 
were fed on corn-soybean meal basal diets with added different concentrations of 
chromium (0, 600 and 1,200 μg kg(-1) chromium chloride or 600 and 1,200 μg/kg 
chromium L-methionine) from 1 to 49 days of age.
Humoral immunity was assessed 
by intravenous injection of 7% sheep red blood cell (SRBC) followed by 
evaluation of serum for antibody titers in primary and secondary responses.
Cell-mediated immunity was assessed by the cutaneous basophil hypersensitivity 
(CBH) test to phytohemagglutinin (PHA)-P at day 32 and PHA-M at day 48.
Heterophil/lymphocyte (H/L) ratio was also measured as a reliable indicator of 
stress.
The body mass, feed intake and conversion ratio were not influenced by 
dietary chromium (P > 0.05).
Dietary supplementation of both organic and 
inorganic chromium significantly increased primary and secondary antibody 
responses (P < 0.01), and also improved H/L ratio (P < 0.05), CBH response (P < 
0.01) as well as relative weights of thymus (P < 0.05) and spleen (P < 0.01).
Both dietary organic and inorganic chromium caused an increase in serum 
concentrations of Cr and Zn (P < 0.01), but decreased the serum concentration of 
Cu (P < 0.01).
These results suggest that supplemental chromium especially in 
organic form offers a good management practice to reduce heat stress-related 
depression in immunocompetence of broiler chicks.
DOI: 10.1007/s12011-011-9260-1
PMID: 22127829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression in Medical Outpatients 1. Arch Intern Med. 1990 May;150(5):1083-8. doi: 
10.1001/archinte.1990.00390170113024.

Depression in medical outpatients. Underrecognition and misdiagnosis.

Pérez-Stable EJ(1)
 Miranda J, Muñoz RF, Ying YW.
Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, San Francisco General Hospital Medical Center, CA.
Comment in
    Arch Intern Med.
1990 May;150(5):946-8. doi: 10.1001/archinte.150.5.946.
Depression is a common problem in medical outpatients, yet primary care 
physicians recognize the disorder in only about half of their depressed 
patients.
We compared physician recognition of depression (defined by chart 
notation or prescription of antidepressants) with diagnoses generated by the 
Diagnostic Interview Schedule (DIS) in 265 medical outpatients.
Using DIS 
criteria, diagnoses of major depression in the past year or dysthymia (chronic 
minor depression) were made in 70 patients.
Physicians recognized as depressed 
only 25 (35.7%) of the 70 DIS-depressed patients.
However, 36 patients who were 
not depressed according to DIS were "recognized" as depressed by physicians.
Patients misdiagnosed as depressed by physicians were older, less educated, had 
more outpatient visits, and were prescribed more medications.
Receiver operating 
characteristic curves of two self-report depression scales suggest that these 
scales may assist physicians in recognizing depressed outpatients.
We conclude 
that physicians underrecognize and misdiagnose depression in medical 
outpatients.
DOI: 10.1001/archinte.1990.00390170113024
PMID: 2184790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Selectively Bred High Alcohol Sensitivity (HAS) and Low Alcohol Sensitivity (LAS) Rats Differ in Sensitivity to Nicotine <jats:p><jats:bold>Background: </jats:bold> Studies in rodents selectively bred to differ in alcohol sensitivity have suggested that nicotine and ethanol sensitivities may cosegregate during selective breeding. This suggests that ethanol and nicotine sensitivities may in part be genetically correlated.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Methods: </jats:bold> Male and female high alcohol sensitivity (HAS)
 control alcohol sensitivity, and low alcohol sensitivity (LAS) rats were tested for nicotine‐induced alterations in locomotor activity, body temperature, and seizure activity.
Plasma and brain levels of nicotine and its primary metabolite, cotinine, were measured in these animals, as was the binding of [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]cytisine, [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]epibatidine, and [<jats:sup>125</jats:sup>I]α‐bungarotoxin in eight brain regions.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Results: </jats:bold> Both replicate HAS lines were more sensitive to nicotine‐induced locomotor activity depression than the replicate LAS lines.
No consistent HAS/LAS differences were seen on other measures of nicotine sensitivity; however, females were more susceptible to nicotine‐induced seizures than males.
No HAS/LAS differences in nicotine or cotinine levels were seen, nor were differences seen in the binding of nicotinic ligands.
Females had higher levels of plasma cotinine and brain nicotine than males but had lower brain cotinine levels than males.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Conclusions: </jats:bold> Sensitivity to a specific action of nicotine cosegregates during selective breeding for differential sensitivity to a specific action of ethanol.
The differential sensitivity of the HAS/LAS rats is due to differences in central nervous system sensitivity and not to pharmacokinetic differences.
The differential central nervous system sensitivity cannot be explained by differences in the numbers of nicotinic receptors labeled in ligand‐binding experiments.
The apparent genetic correlation between ethanol and nicotine sensitivities suggests that common genes modulate, in part, the actions of both ethanol and nicotine and may explain the frequent coabuse of these agents.</jats:p>
Ultrastructure
 distribution, and transmission of endosymbionts in the whiteflyAleurochiton aceris Modeer (Insecta, Hemiptera, Aleyrodinea) 1.
Protoplasma.
2001;218(1-2):45-53. doi: 10.1007/BF01288359.
Ultrastructure, distribution, and transmission of endosymbionts in the whitefly 
Aleurochiton aceris Modeer (Insecta, Hemiptera, Aleyrodinea).
Szklarzewicz T(1), Moskal A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Systematic Zoology, Institute of Zoology, Jagiellonian 
University, R. Ingardena 6, 30-060 Kraków, Poland.
szkla@zuk.iz.uj.edu.pl

The body of the whitefly Aleurochiton aceris contains specialized cells, termed 
mycetocytes, that enclose endosymbiotic microorganisms.
The endosymbionts are 
transmitted from one generation to the next transovarially.
In contrast to other 
insects, in whiteflies whole intact mycetocytes migrate into the ovaries, 
traverse the follicular epithelium, and reach the oocyte surface (i.e., 
perivitellin space).
The migration of mycetocytes begins in the last instar, 
called puparium, from which imagines emerge.
During this stage the cytoplasm of 
mycetocytes is tightly packed with pleomorphic bacteria and less numerous 
coccoid microorganisms.
In adult females the mycetocytes gather extracellularly 
in the depression of the vitellarial oocyte.
Till the end of oogenesis neither 
pleomorphic nor coccoid microorganisms are released from mycetocytes into the 
oocyte.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01288359
PMID: 11732319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of a single exposure to chlorphenvinphos
 an organophosphate insecticide, on hot-plate behaviour in rats.
1.
Pol J Occup Med.
1990;3(2):215-20.
Effects of a single exposure to chlorphenvinphos, an organophosphate 
insecticide, on hot-plate behaviour in rats.
Gralewicz S(1), Soćko R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Toxicity Evaluation, Nofer Institute of Occupational Medicine, 
Lodz, Poland.
Effect of a single i.p.
exposure to an organophosphate insecticide, 
chlorphenvinphos (CVP), in doses of 1.0 and 3.0 mg/kg (one third and one tenth 
LD50, respectively), on the latency of the paw-lick response (hot plate test) 
was investigated in rats before and after a short inescapable footshock.
The 
test was repeated twice on the 18th and 19th days after the exposure, i.e.
after 
a time sufficient for a full recovery of cholinesterase activity in the blood 
and brain.
On the first day of testing the groups did not differ with respect to 
the paw-lick latency before footshock.
However, the paw-lick latency after 
footshock (the index of stress-induced analgesia) was significantly longer in 
rats exposed to the higher dose of CVP (3.0 mg/kg) than in the control animals.
Twenty four hours later, in the control animals, the paw-lick latencies before 
footshock were shortened in comparison with those recorded on the day before.
An 
opposite effect was observed in the rats exposed to 3.0 mg/kg of CVP.
The data 
suggest that some alterations in the brain functional state may outlast the CVP 
induced depression of cholinesterase activity.
PMID: 2130875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Amide Local Anesthetics Reduce Albumin Extravasation in Burn Injuries 1. Anesthesiology. 1990 Feb;72(2):302-7. doi: 10.1097/00000542-199002000-00016.

Amide local anesthetics reduce albumin extravasation in burn injuries.

Cassuto J(1)
 Nellgård P, Stage L, Jönsson A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Central Hospital, Mölndal, Sweden.
Burn injury was induced in anesthetized rats by exposing the abdominal skin to a 
temperature of 55 degrees C by means of a hot aluminum rod.
Temperature was 
registered on a Grass polygraph.
Skin exposure was interrupted when hot rod 
temperature had decreased to 45 degrees C. A full-thickness burn trauma of the 
skin was induced as judged from histologic sections.
The burned skin was 
dissected and extravasation of Evans blue (EB) bound plasma albumin was 
quantified by a spectrophotometric technique and visualized by fluorescence 
microscopy.
In the first set of experiments, one group of rats (n = 15) was 
topically treated with a lidocaine-prilocaine cream 5% (25 mg of each in 1 g; 
EMLA) for 1.5 h starting 15 min after inducing the burn injury.
In one control 
group (n = 14) the thermal injury was treated with placebo cream.
A second 
control group (n = 15) was topically treated with placebo cream without being 
exposed to thermal trauma.
Results showed a significant inhibition of EB-albumin 
extravasation in the skin of burned rats treated with lidocaine-prilocaine cream 
compared with placebo-treated burned skin (P less than 0.001).
EB-albumin 
contents in the skin of burned rats treated with lidocaine-prilocaine cream did 
not differ significantly from unburned skin (P greater than 0.05).
In the second 
set of experiments continuous iv lidocaine infusions at a rate of 5 (n = 10), 10 
(n = 12), 20 (n = 10), or 30 (n = 10) micrograms.kg-1.min-1 was given.
(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1097/00000542-199002000-00016
PMID: 2301761 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Histochemical findings on sodium-potassium activated adenosine triphosphatase (NaK-ATPase) activity in the cornea. 1. Acta Ophthalmol Suppl. 1974;123:88-93.

Histochemical findings on sodium-potassium activated adenosine triphosphatase 
(NaK-ATPase) activity in the cornea.

Tervo T
 Palkama A.

PMID: 4368773 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Evaluation of standardized <i>Bacopa monniera</i> extract in sodium fluoride-induced behavioural
 biochemical, and histopathological alterations in mice <jats:p> Effect of standardized Bacopa monniera (BM; family: Scrophulariaceae) extract (100 and 300 mg/kg) against sodium fluoride (NaF; 100 and 200 ppm)-induced behavioural, biochemical, and neuropathological alterations in mice was evaluated.
Akinesia, rotarod (motor coordination), forced swim test (depression), open field test (anxiety), transfer latency (memory), cholinesterase (ChE), and oxidative stress (superoxide dismutase, catalase, glutathione peroxidase, and lipid peroxidation) were determined in mice treated with NaF for 30 days alone and in combination with BM.
NaF induced motor incoordination, depression, and memory impairment, and these were prevented by coadministration of BM in mice.
However, NaF did not alter the weight gain, feed/water consumption, and anxiety profile.
Suppression of ChE levels and increased oxidative stress were observed in mice treated with NaF.
Coadministration of BM significantly improved the memory, ChE levels, and antioxidant enzymes but failed to alter the fluoride levels in NaF-treated mice.
Histopathological studies revealed that BM protected the neuropathological alterations induced by NaF.
</jats:p>
[Effect of subinhibitory concentrations of antibacterial agents on the adherence of fimbriated Escherichia coli to uroepithelial cells]. 1. Rev Latinoam Microbiol. 1988 Jan-Mar;30(1):5-9.

[Effect of subinhibitory concentrations of antibacterial agents on the adherence 
of fimbriated Escherichia coli to uroepithelial cells].

[Article in Spanish]

Padilla Espinosa C
 Brevis P, Zemelman R, Vivaldi E.

PMID: 2902677 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sleep Disturbances among Persons who are Visually Impaired: Survey of Dog Guide Users <jats:p> It is claimed that blindness may predispose individuals to disturbed sleep because light is an important mechanism for entraining circadian rhythms. One in five respondents in a survey described the quality of their sleep as either poor or very poor. Exercise was associated with better sleep
 and depression with poorer sleep.
That visual acuity did not predict the quality of sleep casts doubt on the notion that restricted visual (photic) input is a widespread cause of sleep disturbance among persons who are visually impaired.
As with sighted persons, depression appears to be a highly significant risk factor for disturbed sleep in persons who are visually impaired.
</jats:p>
Plasticity in the Neurotransmitter Repertoire <jats:p>
            A switch in the type of neurotransmitter released in the brain underlies changes in mammalian behavior associated with day-night cycles.
            <jats:named-content content-type="related-content">
              [Also see Research Article by
              <jats:related-article xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" ext-link-type="doi" issue="6131" page="449" related-article-type="in-this-issue" vol="340" xlink:href="10.1126/science.1234152">
                Dulcis
                <jats:italic>et al.</jats:italic>
              </jats:related-article>
              ]
            </jats:named-content>
          </jats:p>
Mammalian neuromuscular development accelerated with early but slowed with late gestational administration of ACTH Peptide <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The neuropeptide ACTH 4–10
 a nonsteroidogenic fragment of adrenocorticotropic hormone, has two distinct and opposite effects on developing nerve and muscle.
Muscle is positively influenced by ACTH during the first part of gestation (G days 3–12) before innervation occurs.
Subsequent effects on innervation are largely depressive and exerted only during G13–21.
Treatment during G3–12 increases twitch amplitude, rise time and speed of contraction of directly and indirectly stimulated extensor digitorum longus (EDL) muscle of two wk old rats.
Treatment during G13–21 slows contractions of indirectly stimulated EDL, whereas treatment throughout gestation (G3–G21) shows little effect.
Thus, ACTH first accelerates muscle development then modulates this development through neuronal depression.</jats:p>
Decrease of anesthetics activity by electroacupuncture on Jen-Chung point in rabbits 1. Neurosci Lett. 1995 Dec 29;202(1-2):93-6. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(95)12214-1.

Decrease of anesthetics activity by electroacupuncture on Jen-Chung point in 
rabbits.

Chang CL(1)
 Lee JC, Tseng CC, Chang YH, Cheng JT.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan City, 
Taiwan, ROC.
The effect of acupuncture at life-saving point on the central nervous depressive 
action of anesthetics was investigated in rabbits.
Stimulation with 
electroacupuncture (EA) inserted in Jen-Chung point, which is located at the 
mid-point on the upper lip, decreased the sleeping time induced by pentobarbital 
or propofol.
However, this action of acupuncture was not modified by naloxone at 
the doses sufficient to block opiate receptors.
Plasma beta-endorphin detected 
by radioimmunoassay was also not markedly changed in rabbits which received 
similar electrostimulation.
Moreover, pretreatment with para-chlorophenylalanine 
at a dose sufficient to deplete endogenous 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) failed to 
influence the action of EA.
Mediation of endogenous opioids and/or 5-HT in this 
action of EA was then ruled out.
Prazosin reversed the sleeping time decreasing 
action of acupuncture in a dose-dependent manner.
Also, the action of 
acupuncture was eliminated in rabbits which received intracerebroventricular 
injection of guanethidine at a dose which could block noradrenergic nerve 
terminals.
It is suggested that stimulation of Jen-Chung point through EA can 
activate noradrenergic neurotransmission in the brain, which in turn reduces the 
central nervous depressive activity of anesthetics.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(95)12214-1
PMID: 8787839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Neutrophil depletion fails to modify myocardial no reflow and functional recovery after coronary reperfusion 1. J Am Coll Cardiol. 1989 Dec;14(7):1803-13. doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(89)90036-3.

Neutrophil depletion fails to modify myocardial no reflow and functional 
recovery after coronary reperfusion.

Carlson RE(1)
 Schott RJ, Buda AJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Michigan Medical Center, Ann 
Arbor 48109-0366.
Comment in
    J Am Coll Cardiol.
1989 Dec;14(7):1814-5. doi: 10.1016/0735-1097(89)90037-5.
Recent studies suggest that neutrophil accumulation and activation in 
postischemic myocardium may be responsible for myocardial no reflow, which is 
characterized by an incomplete restoration of blood flow after reperfusion.
To 
examine this further, 11 open chest, anesthetized dogs received bolus injections 
of a bovine neutrophil antiserum that produced an average 81 +/- 5% depletion of 
circulating neutrophils, and 10 control dogs received nonimmune serum.
Each 
animal underwent 2 h of left circumflex artery occlusion followed by 4 h of 
reperfusion.
Simultaneous two-dimensional echocardiography and radioactive 
microsphere blood flow studies were performed at baseline, 2 h of occlusion and 
early (approximately 5 min) and 4 h of reperfusion.
During occlusion, both 
groups developed similar reductions in myocardial blood flow and levels of 
ischemic zone myocardial wall thinning.
At early reperfusion, similar levels of 
hyperemia and regional hypokinesia were observed for both groups.
By late 
reperfusion, both groups experienced significant no reflow in the subendocardium 
(p less than 0.05) and reduced reflow in the mid-myocardium.
Regional depression 
in ischemic zone function persisted throughout the reperfusion period in both 
groups.
However, infarct size expressed as a percent of left ventricular weight, 
assessed by triphenyltetrazolium chloride staining, was smaller for the 
neutrophil depletion group compared with the control group (8.7 +/- 1.3% versus 
13.1 +/- 1.8%, p less than 0.05).
It is concluded that an 81% neutrophil 
depletion fails to modify the no reflow phenomenon or improve functional 
recovery after 2 h of coronary artery occlusion and 4 h of coronary reperfusion 
despite modification of the ultimate size of necrosis.
DOI: 10.1016/0735-1097(89)90036-3
PMID: 2584572 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
PHARMACOLOGICAL STUDIES ON SURUGATOXIN
 THE TOXIC PRINCIPLE FROM JAPANESE IVORY MOLLUSC <i>(Babylonia japonica)</i> <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Some pharmacological properties of surugatoxin (SGTX), a purified toxic substance from the Japanese ivory mollusc (<jats:italic>Babylonia japonica</jats:italic>), have been investigated.
SGTX (50 nmol/kg i.v.)
produced a prolonged fall of blood pressure in anaesthetized cats.
This hypotensive effect was neither blocked by atropine and propranolol nor by spinal cord transection.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>SGTX (37‐50 nmol/kg i.v.)
inhibited the hypertensive and hypotensive response to <jats:bold>1</jats:bold>, 1‐dimethyl‐4‐phenylpiperazinium iodide (DMPP) and to electrical stimulation of the splanchnic and vagal nerve, whereas it usually augmented the hypertensive response to adrenaline and to 4‐(<jats:italic>m</jats:italic>‐hlorophenylcarbamoyloxy)‐2‐butynyltrimethylammonium chloride (McN‐A‐343) in anaesthetized cats.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Close intra‐arterial injection of SGTX (6.2‐12.3 nmol/kg) to the superior cervical ganglion blocked the contractile response of the nictitating membrane to preganglionic stimulation of cervical sympathetic nerve or injected DMPP, but not to postganglionic stimulation or to injected adrenaline and McN‐A‐343.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>SGTX affected neither the indirectly nor the directly stimulated response of the rat isolated phrenic nerve‐diaphragm at concentrations less than 12.3 MM.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The effect of SGTX on the contractile response to some agonists and on the twitch response to transmural stimulation in the guinea‐pig isolated ileum was investigated.
At &lt;12.3 MM SGTX did not depress responses to acetylcholine or histamine.
The curves for nicotine‐ and DMPP‐induced contractions were shifted to the right and depressed gradually as the concentration of SGTX was increased (12.3 nM‐1.23 μM).
SGTX partially inhibited the contraction induced by 5‐hydroxytryptamine and the transmurally‐stimulated twitch response.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>These results suggest that SGTX has a ganglion‐blocking action.
The mode of anti‐nicotinic action of SGTX in the guinea‐pig isolated ileum seems to differ from that of hexamethonium and tetraethylammonium and to resemble more closely that of mecamylamine.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Antagonism of presynaptically mediated depressant responses and cyclic AMP-coupled metabotropic glutamate receptors 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1994 Jan 15;266(2):187-92. doi: 10.1016/0922-4106(94)90109-0.

Antagonism of presynaptically mediated depressant responses and cyclic 
AMP-coupled metabotropic glutamate receptors.

Kemp M(1)
 Roberts P, Pook P, Jane D, Jones A, Jones P, Sunter D, Udvarhelyi P, 
Watkins J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medical Sciences, Bristol, UK.
The depression of monosynaptic excitation of neonatal rat motoneurones by 
(1S,3S)- and (1S,3R)-1-aminocyclopentane-1,3-dicarboxylate (ACPD) and by 
L-2-amino-4-phosphonobutyrate (L-AP4), which is probably presynaptically 
mediated, is antagonized by (+/-)- and (+)-alpha-methyl-4-carboxyphenylglycine 
(MCPG).
The same phenylglycine derivatives also antagonize the depression of 
forskolin-stimulated cyclic AMP synthesis effected by the two ACPD stereoisomers 
and by L-AP4.
These results support previous suggestions that presynaptic 
depression is mediated by metabotropic glutamate receptors negatively coupled to 
adenylyl cyclase activity.
MCPG is the first antagonist to be reported for these 
receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/0922-4106(94)90109-0
PMID: 8157072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hypotensive and bradycardic effects of classical alpha-sympathomimetic drugs upon intravenous administration to pentobarbitone-anaesthetized rats. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1978 Jan;231(1):98-103.

Hypotensive and bradycardic effects of classical alpha-sympathomimetic drugs 
upon intravenous administration to pentobarbitone-anaesthetized rats.

Timmermans PB
 Fluitman PH, Mackaay JC, van Zwieten PA.
The effects of the classical alpha-sympathomimetic drugs naphazoline, 
tramazoline, xylometazoline, tetryzoline and oxymetazoline on blood pressure and 
heart rate of pentobarbitone-anaesthetized (75 mg/kg; i.p.)
normotensive rats 
were studied following intravenous injections.
With the aid of this experimental 
animal model a dose dependent decrease in mean arterial pressure and heart rate 
could be established for these agents, oxymetazoline excepted, for which only 
the bradycardia could be quantified.
It is suggested that central 
alpha-adrenoceptors are involved in the mechanism of this cardiovascular 
inhibition in view of the most specific alpha-adrenoceptor-stimulating 
properties of these ddrugs.
Additionally, the results indicate that the use of 
pentobarbitone as the anaesthetic enhances the hypotensive action of these 
agents, so that their pronounced peripheral vasopressive response can be 
overcome.
PMID: 25053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of cromoglycate on anaphylactic histamine release from rat peritoneal mast cells 1. Br J Pharmacol. 1973 Sep;49(1):128-30. doi:
10.1111/j.1476-5381.1973.tb08275.x.

Effect of cromoglycate on anaphylactic histamine release from rat peritoneal 
mast cells.

Garland LG.

Cromoglycate (1-30 muM) produced a concentration-dependent inhibition of 
anaphylactic histamine release from actively sensitized rat peritoneal mast 
cells but at lower concentrations (0.01-0.1 muM) occasionally produced a 
concentration-dependent enhancement of histamine release.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1973.tb08275.x
PMCID: PMC1776471
PMID: 4132518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Clofibrate Treatment on the Protein Kinase and Cyclic AMP-Binding Activities in Rat Liver 1. Horm Metab Res. 1978 Sep;10(5):450-1. doi: 10.1055/s-0028-1095841.

Effect of clofibrate treatment on the protein kinase and cyclic AMP-binding 
activities in rat liver.

Catalán RE
 Castillón MP, Priego JG.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0028-1095841
PMID: 213360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long adaptation reveals mostly attractive shifts of orientation tuning in cat primary visual cortex 1. Neuroscience. 2009 Dec 15;164(3):1274-83. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.09.003. Epub 2009 Sep 9.

Long adaptation reveals mostly attractive shifts of orientation tuning in cat 
primary visual cortex.

Ghisovan N(1)
 Nemri A, Shumikhina S, Molotchnikoff S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Montreal, Montréal, PQ, H3C 
3J7, Canada.
In the adult brain, sensory cortical neurons undergo transient changes of their 
response properties following prolonged exposure to an appropriate stimulus 
(adaptation).
In cat V1, orientation-selective cells shift their preferred 
orientation after being adapted to a non-preferred orientation.
There are 
conflicting reports as to the direction of those shifts, towards (attractive) or 
away (repulsive) from the adapter.
Moreover, the mechanisms underlying 
attractive shifts remain unexplained.
In the present investigation we show that 
attractive shifts are the most frequent outcome of a 12 min adaptation.
Overall, 
cells displaying selectivity for oblique orientations exhibit significantly 
larger shifts than cells tuned to cardinal orientations.
In addition, cells 
selective to cardinal orientations had larger shift amplitudes when the absolute 
difference between the original preferred orientation and the adapting 
orientation increased.
Conversely, cells tuned to oblique orientations exhibited 
larger shift amplitudes when this absolute orientation difference was narrower.
Hence, neurons tuned to oblique contours appear to show more plasticity in 
response to small perturbations.
Two different mechanisms appear to produce 
attractive and repulsive orientation shifts.
Attractive shifts result from 
concurrent response depression on the non-adapted flank and selective response 
facilitation on the adapted flank of the orientation tuning curve.
In contrast, 
repulsive shifts are caused solely by response depression on the adapted flank.
We suggest that an early mechanism leads to repulsive shifts while attractive 
shifts engage a subsequent late facilitation.
A potential role for attractive 
shifts may be improved stimulus discrimination around the adapting orientation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.09.003
PMID: 19747528 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Quipazine: a serotoninergic hyperthermic agent in the rabbit 1. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1976 Feb;28(2):170-2. doi: 
10.1111/j.2042-7158.1976.tb04123.x.

Quipazine: a serotoninergic hyperthermic agent in the rabbit.

Quock RM
 Beal GA, Chan EL.
DOI: 10.1111/j.2042-7158.1976.tb04123.x
PMID: 6684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Microscopic and Biochemical Observations of Aortae of Turkeys Fed Copper-deficient Diets with and without Ascorbic Acid 1. J Nutr. 1971 Oct;101(10):1359-66. doi: 10.1093/jn/101.10.1359.

Microscopic and biochemical observations of aortae of turkeys fed 
copper-deficient diets with and without ascorbic acid.

Simpson CF
 Robbins RC, Harms RH.
DOI: 10.1093/jn/101.10.1359
PMID: 5098876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differential effects of difluoromethylornithine on basal and induced activity of cerebral ornithine decarboxylase and mRNA 1. Neuropharmacology. 1991 Apr;30(4):337-43. doi: 10.1016/0028-3908(91)90058-j.

Differential effects of difluoromethylornithine on basal and induced activity of 
cerebral ornithine decarboxylase and mRNA.

Zawia NH(1)
 Mattia CJ, Bondy SC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of California, Irvine 92717.
The induction of the activity of cerebral ornithine decarboxylase (EC 4.1.1.17) 
and mRNA by electrical stimulation exhibits regional differences.
The effects of 
the enzyme inhibitor difluoromethylornithine on these regional variations was 
examined.
Administration of this inhibitor resulted in pronounced depression of 
both basal and induced activity of ornithine decarboxylase in the hippocampus.
Basal activity of the enzyme in the neocortex and the cerebellum appeared to be 
resistant to difluoromethylornithine but the induced enzyme activity was 
sensitive to the effects of this inhibitor.
Susceptibility to 
difluoromethylornithine may be directly correlated with a slower turnover rate 
for ornithine decarboxylase.
These results suggest that ornithine decarboxylase 
in the hippocampus may possess a longer half-life than its counterparts in other 
regions of the brain.
Pretreatment with difluoromethylornithine had no effect on 
the induced ornithine decarboxylase mRNA in the neocortex.
Thus, elevated 
activity of ornithine decarboxylase enzyme, due to electrical stimulation, 
appears to not have any effect on either the transcription or the decay rate of 
the induced ornithine decarboxylase mRNA.
These findings support the concept of 
region-specific regulation of cerebral ornithine decarboxylase.
DOI: 10.1016/0028-3908(91)90058-j
PMID: 1852267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Habenula volume increases with disease severity in unmedicated major depressive disorder as revealed by 7T MRI 1. Eur Arch Psychiatry Clin Neurosci. 2017 Mar;267(2):107-115. doi: 
10.1007/s00406-016-0675-8. Epub 2016 Feb 12.

Habenula volume increases with disease severity in unmedicated major depressive 
disorder as revealed by 7T MRI.

Schmidt FM(1)
 Schindler S(2), Adamidis M(2), Strauß M(2), Tränkner A(2), 
Trampel R(3), Walter M(4), Hegerl U(2), Turner R(3), Geyer S(3), Schönknecht 
P(2).
Author information:
(1)Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Department of Mental Health, 
University Hospital Leipzig, Semmelweisstr.
10, 04103, Leipzig, Germany.
frank.schmidt2@medizin.uni-leipzig.de.
(2)Clinic for Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Department of Mental Health, 
University Hospital Leipzig, Semmelweisstr.
10, 04103, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Max Planck Institute for Cognitive and Brain Sciences, Stephanstr.
1a, 04103, 
Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Clinical Affective Neuroimaging Laboratory, Leibniz Institute for 
Neurobiology, Otto-von-Guericke University, ZENIT building 65, Leipziger Str.
44, 39120, Magdeburg, Germany.
The habenula is a paired epithalamic structure involved in the pathogenesis of 
major depressive disorder (MDD).
Evidence comes from its impact on the 
regulation of serotonergic and dopaminergic neurons, the role in emotional 
processing and studies on animal models of depression.
The present study 
investigated habenula volumes in 20 unmedicated and 20 medicated MDD patients 
and 20 healthy controls for the first time by applying a triplanar segmentation 
algorithm on 7 Tesla magnetic resonance (MR) whole-brain T1 maps.
The hypothesis 
of a right-side decrease of habenula volumes in the MDD patients was tested, and 
the relationship between volumetric abnormalities and disease severity was 
exploratively investigated.
Absolute and relative total and hemispheric habenula 
volumes did not differ significantly between the three groups.
In the patients 
with short duration of disease for which medication effects could be ruled out, 
significant correlations were found between bilateral habenula volumes and 
HAMD-17- and BDI-II-related severities.
In the medicated patients, this positive 
relationship disappeared.
Our findings suggest an involvement of habenula 
pathology in the beginning of MDD, while general effects independent of severity 
or stage of disease did not occur.
Our findings warrant future combined 
tractographic and functional investigation using ultra-high-resolution in vivo 
MR imaging.
DOI: 10.1007/s00406-016-0675-8
PMID: 26873703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fluctuation of Hepatic Enzymes Important in Glucose Metabolism in Relation to Thyroid Function <jats:p>Enzyme activities of pyruvate carboxylase
 phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase, pyruvate kinase and of mitochondrial glycerolphosphate dehydrogenase were studied in the livers of rats under the following states of thyroid function: <jats:sup>131</jats:sup>I‐thyroidectomized rats, <jats:sup>131</jats:sup>I‐thyroidectomized rats treated with triiodothyronine, normal rats treated with excess of triiodothyronine, and normal untreated rats.
In the thyroidectomized group all of the enzyme activities listed were significantly diminished.
After treatment with a single dose of triiodothyronine the activities of pyruvate carboxylase and of pyruvate kinase were restored to normal whereas phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and — most markedly — glycerolphosphate dehydrogenase were raised above the normal level.
After repeated administration of triiodothyronine to normal rats a further increase in the activity of pyruvate carboxylase, phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase and of glycerolphosphate dehydrogenase was observed.</jats:p><jats:p>The activities of glycerolphosphate dehydrogenase and of pyruvate carboxylase 70 h following triiodothyronine injection into hypothyroid rats were more than 50% lower after treatment with actinomycin C suggesting that the increase in enzyme activities was due to increased synthesis of enzyme protein.
Phosphoenolpyruvate carboxykinase activity was not changed significantly by actinomycin C.</jats:p><jats:p>The possible significance of these thyroid hormone dependent enzyme fluctuations in controlling the overall rate of hepatic gluconeogenesis is discussed.</jats:p>
Ketamine-mediated alleviation of electroconvulsive shock-induced memory impairment is associated with the regulation of neuroinflammation and soluble amyloid-beta peptide in depressive-like rats 1. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Jul 10;599:32-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.05.022. Epub 
2015 May 14.

Ketamine-mediated alleviation of electroconvulsive shock-induced memory 
impairment is associated with the regulation of neuroinflammation and soluble 
amyloid-beta peptide in depressive-like rats.

Zhu X(1)
 Li P(2), Hao X(2), Wei K(2), Min S(3), Luo J(2), Xie F(2), Jin J(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.
Electronic address: 
zhuxianlin8@sohu.com.
(2)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.
(3)Department of Anesthesiology, The First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.
Electronic address: 
mins89011068@163.com.
Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is an effective treatment for depression, but 
can result in memory deficits.
This study aimed to determine whether ketamine 
could alleviate electroconvulsive shock (ECS, an analog of ECT in 
animals)-induced memory impairment and the potential molecular mechanism.
Chronic unpredictable mild stress was used to generate animal models of 
depressive-like symptoms.
Sixty adult male Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly 
divided into the following five groups: control group (group C); depressive-like 
model group (group D); ECS group (group DE); ketamine+ECS group (group DKE); and 
ketamine group (group DK).
The sucrose preference test and Morris water maze 
were used to assess behavioral changes.
The expression levels of Iba-1, IL-1β 
and TNF-α were measured by immunohistochemistry and real-time PCR.
Enzyme-linked 
immunosorbent assays were used to detect the levels of soluble Aβ.
We found that 
ECS up-regulated the expression of Iba-1, promoted the release of IL-1β and 
TNF-α, increased the levels of Aβ1-40 and Aβ1-42 in the hippocampus, and 
aggravated memory impairment of the depressive-like rats.
However, ketamine 
reversed these ECS-induced molecular changes and effectively attenuated 
ECS-induced memory impairment.
This cognitive protective effect of ketamine may 
be attributed to its suppression of ECS-induced neuroinflammation and reduction 
of the levels of soluble Aβ.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.05.022
PMID: 25980993 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of prostaglandins in the reversal of one-kidney hypertension in the rabbit. <jats:p>Hypertensive rabbits with a clip on the renal artery of their solitary remaining kidney show an abrupt decrease in blood pressure after the arterial constriction is released. Although the mechanism underlying this phenomenon remains controversial
 some experimental evidence suggests that it could be humorally mediated.
The involvement of prostaglandins was investigated by examining the effect of the release of the arterial constriction on blood pressure, renal blood flow, glomerular filtration rate, and urinary output in five conscious single-kidney hypertensive rabbits in which prostaglandin synthesis was blocked with indomethacin (priming intravenous injection of 9 mg/kg followed by a constant infusion of 1 mg/kg hour-1).
The results were compared with those obtained in another group of five single-kidney hypertensive rabbits submitted to the same protocol but not treated with indomethacin.
The blockade of prostaglandin synthesis with indomethacin prevented the increments in renal blood flow and glomerular filtration rate seen in the control rabbits after unclipping a significantly retarded the appearance of diuresis and the fall in blood pressure.
Despite these observations, the results do not indicate a major participation of prostaglandins in the reversal of single-kidney hypertension, because the decrease in blood pressure 9 hours after the removal of the arterial constriction was similar in both groups.</jats:p>
Naloxone pro-drug rescues morphine induced respiratory depression in Sprague-Dawley rats 1. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2012 Jan 15;180(1):52-60. doi: 
10.1016/j.resp.2011.10.009. Epub 2011 Oct 19.

Naloxone pro-drug rescues morphine induced respiratory depression in 
Sprague-Dawley rats.

Wallisch M(1)
 El Rody NM, Huang B, Koop DR, Baker JR Jr, Olsen GD.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology & Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Oregon Health & 
Science University, Portland, OR 97239-3098, USA.
Respiratory depression is the main obstacle for the safe administration of 
morphine for acute pain after injury.
Due to this complication, new delivery 
methods are needed to insure that safe and effective doses of opioid analgesics 
are administered during emergencies.
A depot formulation containing a naloxone 
pro-drug was designed to release the antidote when morphine causes dangerous 
hypoxic conditions in the blood.
The aim of this work was to test the naloxone 
release in vivo in response to a severe overdose of morphine in the 
Sprague-Dawley rat model.
Non-invasive two-chamber plethysmography was used to 
monitor and record respiration and to test the capability of the naloxone 
pro-drug to respond to and rescue morphine-induced respiratory depression in the 
animal.
We show that the pro-drug formulation can both prevent and reverse 
severe morphine induced respiratory depression.
The animal model demonstrates 
that co-administration of the naloxone pro-drug reliably antagonizes profound 
respiratory depressive effects of morphine.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2011.10.009
PMID: 22027217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Influence of Mirtazapine on the Hypotensive Activity of Enalapril and Propranolol in Spontaneously Hypertensive Rats <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> Mirtazapine is a noradrenergic and specific serotonergic antidepressant. The influence of the drug on the cardiovascular system has not been definitely determined. Therefore
 we made an attempt to evaluate the influence of chronic administration of mirtazapine on the hypotensive action of a single administered dose of propranolol and enalapril in spontaneously hypertensive rats.
The animals were divided into eight experimental groups.
Mirtazapine (5 and 10 mg/kg) was administered intraperitoneally for 14 days.
Twenty‐four hours after the last administration of the drug, the rats received a single intraperitoneal dose of hypotensive drugs (propranolol 5 mg/kg or enalapril 10 mg/kg) or 1% solution of methylcellulose.
Mirtazapine administered chronically did not affect the hypotensive effect of a single dose of propranolol or enalapril in spontaneously hypertensive rats.
It seems that mirtazapine could be a useful drug in patients with depression accompanied by hypertension.</jats:p>
GABAergic modulation of ethanol-induced motor impairment. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1982 Dec;223(3):750-6.

GABAergic modulation of ethanol-induced motor impairment.

Frye GD
 Breese GR.
Direct or indirect pharmacological manipulation of gamma-aminobutyric acid 
(GABA) receptor activity was examined in relation to the motor incoordinating 
actions of ethanol in the rat.
Ethanol (1.13-3.0 g/kg i.p.)
caused a 
dose-dependent increase in the height of aerial righting.
This motor impairment 
was increased selectively by intracisternal injection of the GABA agonists 
muscimol (0.10 microgram), 4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisoxazole(5,4-c) pyridin(3-ol) (1.0 
microgram) and GABA (1000 micrograms).
The GABA antagonist, bicuculline (1.0 and 
5.0 micrograms intracisternally), reduced impairment.
Thus, direct manipulation 
of GABA receptor activity modulated motor incoordination caused by ethanol.
In 
addition, indirect-acting GABA-mimetics, such as gamma-acetylenic GABA (100 
mg/kg i.p.
), aminooxyacetic acid (50 mg/kg i.p.
), ethanolamine-O-sulfate (250 
mg/kg i.p.)
and L-2,4-diaminobutyric acid (600 mg/kg i.p.)
all potentiated the 
increase in the height of aerial righting caused by ethanol treatment.
Failure 
of ethanol to modify the binding of [3H]muscimol to cerebral cortical membranes 
in vitro suggested there was no direct competition for GABA binding sites or 
facilitation of the binding of GABA to these sites by ethanol.
Also, no simple 
relationship was observed between the degree of motor impairment caused by 
either ethanol or gamma-acetylenic GABA and changes in GABA concentration in 
three brain areas.
Although GABAergic neurons may be involved in the mechanism 
underlying ethanol-induced depression of motor coordination, the interaction 
does not involve a direct activation of GABA receptors by ethanol.
PMCID: PMC3048052
PMID: 6292399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Memantine alters striatal plasticity inducing a shift of synaptic responses toward long-term depression 1. Neuropharmacology. 2016 Feb;101:341-50. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.10.015.
 Epub 2015 Dec 3.

Memantine alters striatal plasticity inducing a shift of synaptic responses 
toward long-term depression.

Mancini M(1)
 Ghiglieri V(2), Bagetta V(1), Pendolino V(1), Vannelli A(3), 
Cacace F(1), Mineo D(3), Calabresi P(4), Picconi B(5).
Author information:
(1)Laboratorio di Neurofisiologia, Fondazione Santa Lucia, IRCCS, via del Fosso 
di Fiorano 64, 00143 Rome, Italy.
(2)Laboratorio di Neurofisiologia, Fondazione Santa Lucia, IRCCS, via del Fosso 
di Fiorano 64, 00143 Rome, Italy; Dipartimento di Filosofia, Scienze Sociali, 
Umane e della Formazione, Università degli Studi di Perugia, Piazza Ermini 1, 
06123 Perugia, Italy.
(3)Laboratorio di Neurofisiologia, Fondazione Santa Lucia, IRCCS, via del Fosso 
di Fiorano 64, 00143 Rome, Italy; Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Facoltà di 
Medicina e Chirurgia, Rome, Italy.
(4)Laboratorio di Neurofisiologia, Fondazione Santa Lucia, IRCCS, via del Fosso 
di Fiorano 64, 00143 Rome, Italy; Clinica Neurologica, Dipartimento di Medicina, 
Università degli Studi di Perugia, Ospedale Santa Maria della Misericordia, S. 
Andrea delle Fratte, Via Gambuli, 06156 Perugia, Italy.
(5)Laboratorio di Neurofisiologia, Fondazione Santa Lucia, IRCCS, via del Fosso 
di Fiorano 64, 00143 Rome, Italy.
Electronic address: b.picconi@hsantalucia.it.
Memantine is an open channel blocker that antagonizes NMDA receptors reducing 
the inappropriate calcium (Ca(2+)) influx occurring in presence of moderately 
increased glutamate levels.
At the same time, memantine has the ability to 
preserve the transient physiological activation of NMDA receptor, essential for 
learning and memory formation at synaptic level.
In the present study we 
investigated the effects exerted by memantine on striatal synaptic plasticity in 
rat striatal spiny projection neurons (SPNs).
In vitro application of memantine 
in striatal slices elicited a disruption of long-term potentiation (LTP) 
induction and maintenance, and revealed, in the majority of the recorded 
neurons, a long-term depression (LTD), whose amplitude was 
concentration-dependent (0.3-10 μM).
Interestingly, preincubation with the 
dopamine (DA) D2 receptor antagonist sulpiride (10 μM) prevented 
memantine-induced LTD and restored LTP.
Moreover, the DA D2 agonist quinpirole 
(10 μM), similarly to memantine, induced LTD in a subgroup of SPNs.
In addition, 
memantine-induced LTD was also prevented by the CB1 endocannabinoid receptor 
antagonist AM 251 (1 μM).
These results suggest that the actions exerted by 
memantine on striatal synaptic plasticity, and in particular the induction of 
LTD observed in SPNs, could be attributed to its ability to activate DA D2 
receptors.
By contrast, blockade of NMDA receptor is not involved in 
memantine-induced LTD since APV (30 μM) and MK801 (10 μM), two NMDA receptor 
antagonists, failed to induce this form of synaptic plasticity.
Our data 
indicate that memantine could be used as treatment of neurological disorders in 
which DA D2 receptor represents a possible therapeutic target.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.10.015
PMID: 26471421 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Separation of the convulsions and antidepressant-like effects produced by the delta-opioid agonist SNC80 in rats 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2005 Nov;182(4):588-96. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-005-0138-9. Epub 2005 Oct 19.

Separation of the convulsions and antidepressant-like effects produced by the 
delta-opioid agonist SNC80 in rats.

Jutkiewicz EM(1)
 Rice KC, Traynor JR, Woods JH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Michigan Medical School, 1301 MSRB 
III, Ann Arbor, MI 48109-0632, USA.
ejutkiew@umich.edu

RATIONALE: Delta-opioid agonists produce a number of behavioral effects, 
including convulsions, antinociception, locomotor stimulation, and 
antidepressant-like effects.
The development of these compounds as treatments 
for depression is limited by their convulsive effects.
Therefore, determining 
how to separate the convulsive and antidepressant-like characteristics of these 
compounds is essential for their potential clinical use.
OBJECTIVE: The present study tests the hypothesis that the rate of delta-opioid 
agonist administration greatly contributes to the convulsive properties, but not 
the antidepressant-like effects, of delta-opioid agonists.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The delta-opioid agonist SNC80 (1, 3.2, and 10 mg kg-1 or 
vehicle) was administered to Sprague-Dawley rats by intravenous infusion over 
different durations of time (20 s, 20, or 60 min).
Convulsions were measured by 
observation prior to determining antidepressant-like effects in the forced swim 
test.
RESULTS: Slowing the rate of SNC80 administration minimized delta 
agonist-induced convulsions without altering the effects of SNC80 in the forced 
swim test.
CONCLUSIONS: These data suggest that delta agonist-induced antidepressant 
properties are independent of convulsive effects, and that it may be possible to 
eliminate the convulsions produced by delta agonists, further promoting their 
potential clinical utility.
DOI: 10.1007/s00213-005-0138-9
PMCID: PMC1307499
PMID: 16163520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Kinetics and distribution of transforming growth factor (TGF)-ß 1 mRNA in the dorsal skin of hypotrichotic WBN/ILA-Htrats following topical application of T-2 toxin 1. Exp Toxicol Pathol. 2000 Aug;52(4):297-301. doi:
10.1016/s0940-2993(00)80050-0.

Kinetics and distribution of transforming growth factor (TGF)-beta 1 mRNA in the 
dorsal skin of hypotrichotic WBN/ILA-Ht rats following topical application of 
T-2 toxin.

Albarenque SM(1)
 Shinozuka J, Suzuki K, Nakayama H, Doi K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, Faculty of Agriculture, The University of 
Tokyo, Japan.
Depression of basal cell proliferating activity and subsequent induction of 
basal cell apoptosis in the epidermis and infiltration of inflammatory cells 
including mast cells in the dermis were observed in the dorsal skin of 
hypotrichotic WBN/ILA-Ht rats following the topical application of T-2 toxin in 
our previous study (ALBARENQUE et al.
1999).
In the present study, kinetics of 
TGF-beta 1 mRNA was investigated using the same experimental system.
The level 
of TGF-beta 1 mRNA of the whole skin tissue measured by competitive RT-PCR 
method showed a slight elevation from 6 to 12 hours after treatment (HAT) and 
reached the significantly higher level at 24HAT compared with the control skin.
The increase in signals of TGF-beta 1 mRNA detected by in situ hybridization 
method started at 3HAT in the epidermis and progressed thereafter both in the 
epidermis and in the dermis.
These results suggest that the elevated level of 
TGF-beta 1 mRNA may have a close relation to the induction of epidermal basal 
cell apoptosis as well as to the intradermal infiltration of mast cells and 
fibroblasts following the topical application of T-2 toxin.
DOI: 10.1016/s0940-2993(00)80050-0
PMID: 10987180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pre-emptive intrathecal administration of an NMDA receptor antagonist (AP-5) prevents hyper-reflexia in a model of persistent visceral pain 1. Pain. 1994 Jun;57(3):335-340. doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(94)90009-4.

Pre-emptive intrathecal administration of an NMDA receptor antagonist (AP-5) 
prevents hyper-reflexia in a model of persistent visceral pain.

Rice ASC(1)
 McMahon SB.
Author information:
(1)Nuffield Department of Anaesthetics and Oxford Regional Pain Relief Unit, 
OxfordUK Sherrington School of Physiology, UMDS, London SE1 7EH UK.
Dorsal horn sensitization following somatic noxious stimuli is partly mediated 
by the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) sub-type of glutamate receptor.
This 
phenomenon has been comparatively sparsely investigated in the area of visceral 
pain.
We have therefore investigated the role of spinal NMDA receptors in 
central sensitization in an animal model of persistent visceral pain.
In 
anaesthetized rats the lumbosacral spinal cord was exposed by laminectomy and 
the pre-emptive effect of intrathecal AP-5 upon the hyper-reflexia associated 
with chemical inflammation of the bladder was investigated.
The effect of 
intrathecal AP-5 (an NMDA receptor antagonist) upon the normal cystometrogram 
(CMG) was also measured.
AP-5 (125-1000 micrograms) prevented the hyper-flexia 
associated with bladder inflammation in a dose-dependant fashion.
In general, 
within the dose range 62.5-1000 micrograms, AP-5 had no significant effect upon 
the normal micturition reflex.
However, at the top of this dose range a minor 
non-significant depression of this reflex was noted.
NMDA receptors do not 
appear to mediate the micturition reflex at a spinal cord level.
However, they 
are involved in the induction of hyper-reflexia following urinary bladder 
inflammation, this hyper-reflexia can be prevented by pre-emptive intrathecal 
administration of AP-5.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3959(94)90009-4
PMID: 7936711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Quantifying realized inbreeding in wild and captive animal populations 1. Heredity (Edinb). 2015 Apr;114(4):397-403. doi: 10.1038/hdy.2014.116. Epub
2015  Jan 14.

Quantifying realized inbreeding in wild and captive animal populations.

Knief U(1)
 Hemmrich-Stanisak G(2), Wittig M(2), Franke A(2), Griffith SC(3), 
Kempenaers B(1), Forstmeier W(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioural Ecology and Evolutionary Genetics, Max Planck 
Institute for Ornithology, Seewiesen, Germany.
(2)Institute of Clinical Molecular Biology, Christian-Albrechts-University, 
Kiel, Germany.
(3)1] Department of Biological Sciences, Macquarie University, Sydney, New South 
Wales, Australia [2] School of Biological, Earth and Environmental Sciences, 
University of New South Wales, Sydney, New South Wales, Australia.
Most molecular measures of inbreeding do not measure inbreeding at the scale 
that is most relevant for understanding inbreeding depression-namely the 
proportion of the genome that is identical-by-descent (IBD).
The inbreeding 
coefficient FPed obtained from pedigrees is a valuable estimator of IBD, but 
pedigrees are not always available, and cannot capture inbreeding loops that 
reach back in time further than the pedigree.
We here propose a molecular 
approach to quantify the realized proportion of the genome that is IBD 
(propIBD), and we apply this method to a wild and a captive population of zebra 
finches (Taeniopygia guttata).
In each of 948 wild and 1057 captive individuals 
we analyzed available single-nucleotide polymorphism (SNP) data (260 SNPs) 
spread over four different genomic regions in each population.
This allowed us 
to determine whether any of these four regions was completely homozygous within 
an individual, which indicates IBD with high confidence.
In the highly nomadic 
wild population, we did not find a single case of IBD, implying that inbreeding 
must be extremely rare (propIBD=0-0.00094, 95% CI).
In the captive population, a 
five-generation pedigree strongly underestimated the average amount of realized 
inbreeding (FPed=0.013<propIBD=0.064), as expected given that pedigree founders 
were already related.
We suggest that this SNP-based technique is generally 
useful for quantifying inbreeding at the individual or population level, and we 
show analytically that it can capture inbreeding loops that reach back up to a 
few hundred generations.
DOI: 10.1038/hdy.2014.116
PMCID: PMC4359978
PMID: 25585923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Protein biosynthesis in rat liver cell nuclei]. 1. Hoppe Seylers Z Physiol Chem. 1969 Oct;350(10):1273-8.

[Protein biosynthesis in rat liver cell nuclei].

[Article in German]

Weser U
 Koolman J.

PMID: 4187478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Glutathione depletion in the guinea pig and its effect on the acute cochlear toxicity of ethacrynic acid 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1988 Oct 1;37(19):3743-7. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(88)90409-1.

Glutathione depletion in the guinea pig and its effect on the acute cochlear 
toxicity of ethacrynic acid.

Lazenby CM(1)
 Lee SJ, Harpur ES, Gescher A.
Author information:
(1)MRC Mechanisms of Drug Toxicity Research Group, Aston University, Birmingham, 
U.K.
There is controversy as to whether or not the acute cochlear toxicity of 
ethacrynic acid (EA) is dependent upon its metabolic conversion to EA-cysteine 
via conjugation with glutathione.
In order to investigate this we examined the 
acute effects of EA on cochlear potentials in guinea pigs in which glutathione 
levels were decreased by prior administration of (+/-)-buthionine sulphoximine 
(BSO), an inhibitor of glutamylcysteine synthetase.
First, we determined the 
effects of BSO on hepatic and renal glutathione levels in the guinea pig.
Guinea 
pigs (pigmented animals of both sexes or male albino animals) were killed at 
intervals up to 72 hr after i.p.
administration of 1.6 g kg-1 BSO.
Livers, and 
also kidneys in the case of pigmented guinea pigs, were removed and total 
glutathione (GSH + GSSG) measured.
Glutathione levels reached a nadir in the 
liver at 24-48 hr (11% of control) and in the kidneys at 24 hr (14% of control) 
after administration of BSO.
Hepatic but not renal levels approached control 
values by 72 hr.
There were no sex or strain differences.
Pigmented guinea pigs 
were anaesthetised and their endocochlear potential and a.c. cochlear potential 
in response to a 4 kHz tone were measured using an intracochlear microelectrode.
The depression of these potentials by i.v.
administration of 60 mg kg-1 EA was 
not affected by administration of 1.6 g kg-1 BSO 24 hr earlier, despite profound 
depletion of glutathione.
Also prior p.o.
administration of N-acetyl-L-cysteine 
did not affect hepatic glutathione levels nor modify the toxicity of EA.
These 
results suggest that the acute cochlear toxicity of EA is not altered by 
glutathione depletion, a finding which argues against a role for the metabolic 
activation of EA in its ototoxicity.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(88)90409-1
PMID: 3178887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Functional Depression of Isolated Perfused Rat Heart Mediated by Activated Leukocytes 1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 1994 Oct;24(4):638-47. doi: 
10.1097/00005344-199410000-00015.

Functional depression of isolated perfused rat heart mediated by activated 
leukocytes: protective effect of cloricromene.

Salvatico E(1)
 Aliev GM, Novello D, Prosdocimi M.

Author information:
(1)Fidia Research Laboratories, Abano Terme, PD, Italy.
Langendorff rat heart preparations were perfused with suspensions of human 
leukocytes containing approximately 65% polymorphonuclear cells (PMN).
The cells 
were either unstimulated or activated with 1.6 x 10(-8) phorbol 12-myristate 
13-acetate (PMA).
Left ventricular developed pressure (LVDP), coronary flow 
(CF), and heart rate (HR) were recorded during PMN infusion (10 min) and for the 
recovery period (30 min).
PMN were also pretreated with cloricromene (CLO 10-50 
microM), a drug that inhibits platelet aggregation and PMN adhesion to 
endothelial cells (EC).
Infusion of unstimulated cells did not affect cardiac 
function.
Infusion of activated cells caused CF reduction (-44 +/- 4% at end of 
infusion; -24 +/- 4% at end of recovery, expressed as percentage of variation 
vs. basal value), LVDP decrease (-44 +/- 5% at end of infusion, -26 +/- 6% at 
end of recovery) endothelial damage, and leukocyte accumulation in heart as 
compared with hearts infused with unstimulated PMN and sham hearts.
PMN 
accumulation was quantified as myeloperoxidase (MPO) activity (260 +/- 35, 39 
+/- 6, 19 +/- 1 U/g, respectively).
Superoxide dismutase (SOD 600 U/ml), 
catalase (2,200 U/ml), thiourea (10 mM) added to PMN suspension blunted CF 
decrease but not LVDP reduction and MPO increase.
CLO (25-50 microM) 
pretreatment inhibited PMN accumulation, LVDP, and CF reduction by approximately 
50%.
These data suggest a role of leukocyte activation in the genesis of heart 
damage and raise the possibility of a pharmacologic intervention with drugs such 
as CLO that can interfere with this process.
DOI: 10.1097/00005344-199410000-00015
PMID: 7528847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Sensitivity of immunocompetent cells to a hormonal signal in the presence of mitogen]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1993 May;115(5):497-9.

[Sensitivity of immunocompetent cells to a hormonal signal in the presence of 
mitogen].

[Article in Russian]

Shirshev SV.

The chorionic gonadotropin (Cg) effects on the ability of intact and 
mitogen-activated splenocytes to form the adoptive immune response have been 
studied in a short-term cell culture. It has been established
 that an hour 
incubation of non-fractionated spleen cells with CG (40 or 200 IU) leads to 
plaque-forming cell (PFC) suppression.
The culture, deprived of macrophages, 
does not react on the hormone depressive effects, but its low dose, on the 
contrary, stimulates the PFC formation.
Lipopolysaccharide addition into the 
culture of non-fractionated splenocytes does not influence the PFC level, while 
the CG addition leads to intensification of PFC formation processes.
In the cell 
culture, deprived of macrophages, hormone abolishes the immunostimulating effect 
of lipopolysaccharide.
The simultaneous addition of non-fractionated CG 
splenocytes and monoclonal anti-IgM antibodies does not influence the 
immunostimulating effect of mitogenic antibodies.
The possible mechanisms of CG 
effect and the problem of hormonal immunocompetent cell regulation, depending on 
their functional activity are under consideration.
PMID: 8043832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Stretch sensitivity of Golgi tendon organs in fatigued gastrocnemius muscle 1. Med Sci Sports Exerc. 1986 Feb;18(1):69-74.

Stretch sensitivity of Golgi tendon organs in fatigued gastrocnemius muscle.

Hutton RS
 Nelson DL.
Erratum in
    Med Sci Sports Exerc 1986 Apr;18(2):251.
Alterations in Golgi tendon organs' (Ib afferent receptors) stretch sensitivity 
were assessed in fatigued gastrocnemius muscle of cats.
Muscle fatigue to 60-50% 
peak tension was induced in 13 cats by electrical stimulation of L7 and S1 
ventral roots.
Forty-three group Ib afferent fibers were recorded in L7 or S1 
dorsal root filaments before and during fatigue.
Fiber activity was assessed by 
applying to the Achilles tendon a 5-mm ramp stretch at 5 or 25-30 mm X s-1.
Group Ib afferent responses to both velocities of stretch were either completely 
abolished or depressed over several seconds compared to pre-fatigue firing 
frequencies.
When responding, longer latencies (measured at 5 mm X s-1 only) to 
firing onset occurred during fatigue.
Increasing the rate of stretch (250 mm X 
s-1) to produce a 5-mm stretch approximately equivalent to twitch tension time 
revealed a depression more selective to static stretch sensitivity.
Post-excitation depression of the Ib receptor potential appears to be one 
possible mechanism.
These acute adaptations in Ib afferent discharge to muscle 
stretch were opposite in direction to those recently reported in fatigued muscle 
for group Ia and group II muscle spindle afferents.
Functional implications of 
these results are discussed.
PMID: 3959867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
NMDA Receptor and Nitric Oxide Synthase Activation Regulate Polysialylated Neural Cell Adhesion Molecule Expression in Adult Brainstem Synapses <jats:p>Here we report that synapses in the adult dorsal vagal complex
 a gateway for many primary afferent fibers, express a high level of the polysialylated neural cell adhesion molecule (PSA-NCAM).
We show that electrical stimulation of the vagal afferents causes a rapid decrease of PSA-NCAM expression both<jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>and in acute slices.
Inhibition of NMDA receptor activity completely prevented the decrease.
Blockade of calmodulin activation, neuronal nitric oxide (NO) synthase, or soluble guanylyl cyclase and chelation of extracellular NO mimicked this inhibition.
Our data provide a mechanistic framework for understanding how activity-linked stimulation of the NMDA–NO–cGMP pathway induces rapid changes in PSA-NCAM expression, which may be associated with long-term depression.</jats:p>
F1-histone modification at metaphase in Chinese hamster cells 1. Exp Cell Res. 1972 Jul;73(1):113-21. doi: 10.1016/0014-4827(72)90108-5.

F1-histone modification at metaphase in Chinese hamster cells.

Lake RS
 Goidl JA, Salzman NP.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-4827(72)90108-5
PMID: 4338680 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dose- and time-response effects of pantethine on open-field behavior
 and on central neurotransmission in rats 1.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav.
1990 Jan;35(1):165-70. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(90)90222-4.
Dose- and time-response effects of pantethine on open-field behavior, and on 
central neurotransmission in rats.
Vécsei L(1), Widerlöv E, Ekman R, Alling C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Neurochemistry, University of Lund, Sweden.
In this study the dose- and time-related effects of pantethine on open-field 
behavior and central neurotransmissions were investigated in rats.
Pantethine 
administered in low doses (0.48-0.96 mM/kg SC) only marginally influenced the 
activity of the animals, but induced a significant decrease of hypothalamic 
noradrenaline level without influencing the concentrations of dopamine and 
DOPAC.
Injected in higher doses (1.95-3.90 mM/kg SC), the compound produced a 
marked depression of both open-field activity and noradrenaline levels, but 
increased the concentrations of dopamine and DOPAC in the hypothalamus.
Twelve 
hr after the administration of the substance, its effect was attenuated, and 24 
hr after the treatment neither the behavioral nor the monoamine parameters 
differed significantly from the control values.
Concerning the somatostatin, 
pantethine administered in high doses (1.95-3.90 mM/kg SC) decreased the 
striatal concentration of somatostatin 4 hr after the injection, and this effect 
was attenuated 24 hr after the treatment.
These data suggest that the 
pantethine-induced behavioral changes are correlated with its effect on central 
catecholaminergic and somatostatinergic transmission.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(90)90222-4
PMID: 1969162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Increased asynchronous release and aberrant calcium channel activation in amyloid precursor protein deficient neuromuscular synapses 1. Neuroscience. 2007 Nov 23;149(4):768-78. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.08.025. Epub 2007 Aug 28.

Increased asynchronous release and aberrant calcium channel activation in 
amyloid precursor protein deficient neuromuscular synapses.

Yang L(1)
 Wang B, Long C, Wu G, Zheng H.

Author information:
(1)Huffington Center on Aging, Baylor College of Medicine, One Baylor Plaza, 
MS230, Houston, TX 77030, USA.
Despite the critical roles of the amyloid precursor protein (APP) in Alzheimer's 
disease pathogenesis, its physiological function remains poorly established.
Our 
previous studies implicated a structural and functional activity of the APP 
family of proteins in the developing neuromuscular junction (NMJ).
Here we 
performed comprehensive analyses of neurotransmission in mature neuromuscular 
synapse of APP deficient mice.
We found that APP deletion led to reduced 
paired-pulse facilitation and increased depression of synaptic transmission with 
repetitive stimulation.
Readily releasable pool size and total releasable 
vesicles were not affected, but probability of release was significantly 
increased.
Strikingly, the amount of asynchronous release, a measure sensitive 
to presynaptic calcium concentration, was dramatically increased, and 
pharmacological studies revealed that it was attributed to aberrant activation 
of N- and L-type Ca(2+) channels.
We propose that APP modulates synaptic 
transmission at the NMJ by ensuring proper Ca(2+) channel function.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.08.025
PMCID: PMC2199265
PMID: 17919826 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of intertrigeminal region NMDA and non-NMDA receptors on respiratory responses in rats 1. Respir Physiol Neurobiol. 2007 Apr 16;156(1):40-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.resp.2006.07.005. Epub 2006 Aug 24.

Effects of intertrigeminal region NMDA and non-NMDA receptors on respiratory 
responses in rats.

Radulovacki M(1)
 Stoiljkovic M, Saponjic J, Carley DW.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, M/C 868, University of Illinois at Chicago, 835 
S. Wolcott Avenue, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
mradulo@uic.edu

Respiratory disturbance, including apnea, can be induced by microinjection of 
glutamate into the intertrigeminal region (ITR) of the lateral pons, a region 
that is anatomically coupled to both the dorsal and ventral respiratory groups 
of the medulla.
We showed that the ITR plays a functional role in regulating 
both vagal reflex apnea and spontaneous sleep-related apnea in rats, but the 
mechanisms have not been determined.
This study shows that functional NMDA 
receptors are expressed in the ITR since the blockade of these receptors by AP5, 
a specific NMDA receptor antagonist, was fully effective in blocking apnea 
induced by glutamate injection within this region.
Selective blockade of ITR 
NMDA receptors had no effect on the immediate apnea evoked by an intravenous 
5-HT bolus, whereas the nonspecific glutamate receptor antagonist kynurenic acid 
significantly increased the duration of this vagal reflex apnea.
These findings 
are of interest because pontine NMDA receptors participate in inspiratory 
off-switch mechanisms and have been implicated in various short- and long-term 
potentiation and depression phenomena.
These data support the involvement of ITR 
non-NMDA receptors in modulation of reflex apnea per se, whereas NMDA receptors 
play a role in damping respiratory responses to transient disturbances.
DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2006.07.005
PMID: 16934539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Presence of serotonin in the rat vas deferens: Its influence on contractile responses 1. Neuroscience. 1976 Jun;1(3):197-203. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(76)90077-4.

Presence of serotonin in the rat vas deferens: its influence on contractile 
responses.

Fuenmayor L(1)
 Gomez J, Campos HA, Romero E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Pharmacology, Vargas Medical School, 
Central University of Venezuela, Caracas, Venezuela.
Serotonin has been detected in the rat vas deferens.
Increase in the serotonin 
concentration by exposure of the rat vas deferens to L-tryptophan occurs in 
vitro.
p-chlorophenylalanine partly blocks the increase in serotonin 
concentration induced by tryptophan in vitro but not in vivo.
Chronic 
sympathetic denervation induces an increase in 5-HT concentration.
Responses of 
the vas deferens to transmural stimulation are depressed by pretreatment of rats 
with p-chlorophenylalanine, and the depression is reversed by incubation in 
vitro with 5-hydroxytryptophan or serotonin.
Serotonin can enhance the response 
to transmural stimulation at low concentrations but has no effect at higher 
concentrations.
Physostigmine-induced enhancement of the response to stimulation 
is depressed only by higher concentrations of serotonin.
The results raise the 
question whether endogenous serotonin can act as a modulator of 
neurotransmission in the rat vas deferens.
PIP: Various experiments were conducted to evaluate the influence of serotonin 
(5-HT) on contractile responses of the rat vas deferens in vitro and in vivo.
In 
vitro exposure of the vas deferens to L-tryptophan increased serotonin 
concentration.
p-Chlorophenylalanine partially blocked this increase in vitro 
but not in vivo.
The concentration of 5-HT was also increased by chronic 
sympathetic denervation.
Pretreatment with p-chlorophenylalanine depressed the 
contractile response to transmural stimulation, while incubation with 
5-hydroxytryptophan or serotonin reversed this effect.
Low, but not high, 
concentrations of serotonin enhanced the response to transmural stimulation.
However, only high concentrations of serotonin depressed the 
physostigmine-induced enhancement of the contractile response to transmural 
stimulation.
The results suggest that endogenous serotonin may modulate 
neurotransmission in the rat vas deferens.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(76)90077-4
PMID: 11370231 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The synthesis of ribonucleic acid in immature rat uterus responding to oestradiol-17β <jats:p>Stimulation of incorporation of labelled precursors into the RNA of immature rat uterus is an early result of oestradiol-17β action. However
 the extent of the increased incorporation varies with the mode of administration of the labelled precursors and with the weight of the rat.
At the age and weight range normally used response is maximal at ten times control incorporation, 4h after the administration of 0.3μg or more of oestradiol-17β.
Under these conditions the stimulation of incorporation into the acid-soluble fraction is only 2–2.5-fold.
When the purified RNA is separated on polyacrylamide gels the major increase in incorporation of radioactive precursor is found in rRNA and 4S RNA; the formation of the former has been followed from the 45S precursor.
Preceding these events by at least 30min, however, is an increase in the incorporation of precursor into RNA species of very high molecular weight, which remained in the first few slices of the gel.
The possible significance of these findings is discussed.
The increased synthesis of rRNA in response to oestradiol-17β is more strongly inhibited by actinomycin D than the synthesis of other RNA species.
Cycloheximide, depending on time of administration and dosage, inhibits either RNA synthesis or the maturation of rRNA.</jats:p>
Cardiovascular effects of capsaicin in dogs and rabbits. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1972 Jun;181(3):512-21.

Cardiovascular effects of capsaicin in dogs and rabbits.

Toda N
 Usui H, Nishino N, Fujiwara M.

PMID: 5033016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of left heart bypass on right ventricular function. 1. Trans Am Soc Artif Intern Organs. 1982;28:543-6.

Effects of left heart bypass on right ventricular function.

Miyamoto AT
 Tanaka S, Matloff JM.
Right ventricular function has been studied in a canine ejecting heart model 
in-situ with intact sympathetic innervation and constant cardiac output, during 
varying degrees of left heart bypass ratio ranging from nil to total left 
ventricular decompression.
The right ventricular function deteriorates as the 
left heart bypass ratio increases, reaching the maximal degree of RV depression 
when the LV is maximally decompressed.
Some practical implications for the 
conduction of left heart bypass are discussed.
PMID: 7164298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differential Effects of Inhalation Anesthetics on Myocardial Potentiated-state Contractions In Vitro 1. Anesthesiology. 1988 Apr;68(4):534-40. doi: 10.1097/00000542-198804000-00010.

Differential effects of inhalation anesthetics on myocardial potentiated-state 
contractions in vitro.

DeTraglia MC(1)
 Komai H, Rusy BF.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Wisconsin, Madison 53792.
The effects of enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane on myocardial 
potentiated-state contractions were examined in a study in which each of the 
anesthetics was presented, in random order, to each of eight isolated rabbit 
papillary muscles.
Post-rest potentiated-state contractions were elicited by 
imposing a stimulus at precisely timed intervals following a 2-Hz steady-state 
stimulus train.
The strength of these contractions is known to be highly 
dependent on sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) Ca2+ release.
The increment in tension 
developed in potentiated state, as compared to the steady state, is directly 
attributed to the potentiation process, and is defined here as potentiated-state 
strength (PSS).
Effects of enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane on the time 
course of development of the potentiated state were characterized, as were the 
effects of incremental doses of these anesthetics on PSS.
Anesthetic gas phase 
concentrations that produced 50% depression of contractile tension at 0.05 Hz 
steady-state stimulation were 0.6% halothane, 1.4% isoflurane, and 1.6% 
enflurane.
Muscles exhibited maximal PSS of 0.91 +/- 0.01 g/mm2 in the absence 
of anesthetics.
Halothane (0.6%) and enflurane (1.6%) caused significant 
depression of PSS to 0.45 +/- 0.06 and 0.61 +/- 0.06 g/mm2, respectively, while 
isoflurane (1.4%) preserved PSS at 0.95 +/- 0.09 g/mm2.
Concentration profiles 
showed that the depression of PSS by halothane and enflurane was dose dependent.
Isoflurane, up to 2.3%, failed to depress PSS.
The time interval for development 
of optimum PSS, 1.5 to 2.0 s, was unaffected by any of the anesthetics.
(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1097/00000542-198804000-00010
PMID: 3354890 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The interaction of thyroid state
 MAOI drug treatment, and light on the level and circadian pattern of wheel-running in rats 1.
Biol Psychiatry.
1994 Mar 1;35(5):324-34. doi: 10.1016/0006-3223(94)90036-1.
The interaction of thyroid state, MAOI drug treatment, and light on the level 
and circadian pattern of wheel-running in rats.
Duncan WC Jr(1), Schull J.
Author information:
(1)Clinical Psychobiology Branch, National Institutes of Mental Health, 
Bethesda, MD 20892.
In order to examine the relationship between thyroid status, the circadian 
system, and antidepressant drug response, the antidepressant drug clorgyline, a 
monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI), was administered chronically to 
sham-operated or thyroparathyroidectomized rats.
Wheel-running was monitored 
continuously in a light-dark (LD) cycle, and then in constant dim light.
In LD, 
MAOI treatment increased levels of running.
This effect was delayed in 
hypothyroid rats relative to euthyroid rats.
In constant light, the MAOI-induced 
increase in running was diminished in euthyroid but not hypothyroid animals.
Hypothyroid animals were less responsive to the change in lighting than were 
euthyroid animals, and this was more apparent in hypothyroid rats given MAOI.
The daily pattern of running differed with lighting condition as well as with 
treatment group.
MAOI-treatment of hypothyroid animals phase-advanced the 
pattern of wheel-running.
MAOI-treatment of control animals increased the 
amplitude of wheel-running particularly in the LD cycle.
These results indicate 
that thyroid status, lighting, and MAOI treatment interact to alter the 
behavioral response to chronic drug treatment.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-3223(94)90036-1
PMID: 8011801 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long-lasting depression of hippocampus-mammillary body evoked potentials following stimulation of the basal amygdala in cats 1. Exp Neurol. 1976 Sep;52(3):544-55. doi: 10.1016/0014-4886(76)90225-9.

Long-lasting depression of hippocampus-mammillary body evoked potentials 
following stimulation of the basal amygdala in cats.

Sturm V
 Stumpf H, Stock G.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-4886(76)90225-9
PMID: 821771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of lithium treatment on rat renal tubule function. Evidence against impaired antidiuretic hormone action. 1. Nephron. 1980;25(6):294-8.

Effect of lithium treatment on rat renal tubule function. Evidence against 
impaired antidiuretic hormone action.

Carney SL
 Wong NL, Dirks JH.
Micropuncture and clearance studies were performed on normal untreated and 
polyuric lithium chloride treated rats (10-12 days).
A persistent hypernatremic 
state quickly developed in the polyuric lithium treated rats during hydropenia 
resulting from an increased urinary loss of water over sodium chloride, as the 
fractional excretion of sodium remained at control levels.
Superficial proximal 
tubule and loop of Henle fluid reabsorption was depressed by 8 and 17%, 
respectively, in lithium-treated rats during this period.
By contrast, water 
reabsorption in the distal tubule and collecting system was significantly 
increased in the lithium animals, being 27% of the filtered load compared with 
20% in normal rats.
These results suggest that the urinary-concentrating defect 
induced by lithium treatment is due primarily to a depression of proximal tubule 
and possibly loop of Henle function, and that water reabsorption within the 
distal nephron may in fact be augmented: thus it is unlikely that the action of 
antidiuretic hormone is significantly impaired.
Marked phosphaturia and 
hypocalciuria were also noted in the lithium-treated rats.
PMID: 7393371 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mechanistic insights into the link between a polymorphism of the 3′UTR of the<i>SLC7A1</i>gene and hypertension 1. Hum Mutat. 2009 Mar;30(3):328-33. doi: 10.1002/humu.20891.

Mechanistic insights into the link between a polymorphism of the 3'UTR of the 
SLC7A1 gene and hypertension.

Yang Z(1)
 Kaye DM.
Author information:
(1)Heart Failure Research Group, Baker IDI Heart and Diabetes Institute, 
Melbourne, Australia.
We previously identified the polymorphism ss52051869 in the 3'UTR of human 
SLC7A1, and demonstrated that it might participate in the apparent link between 
altered endothelial function, decreased L-arginine and nitric oxide (NO) 
metabolism, and a genetic predisposition to essential hypertension.
Here, we 
demonstrate that the major allele contains a consensus sequence for the 
transcription factor SP1 and binds to SP1, in contrast, the minor allele fails 
to bind to SP1.
Resequencing of the entire SLC7A1 coding sequence failed to find 
other informative polymorphisms, indicating that ss52051869 plays a key role in 
the biochemical and clinical association.
In conjunction, the short and long 
variants of the 3'UTR of SLC7A1 contain three and four potential microRNA-122 
(miR-122) binding sites, respectively.
We found that the minor allele is more 
frequently associated with SLC7A1 bearing a long 3'UTR, while the major allele 
is more likely to accompany a short 3'UTR only (P=0.034).
As such, reporter 
genes containing the long 3'UTR from SLC7A1 show much less gene expression than 
those containing short 3'UTR from SLC7A1, regardless of their allele status 
(P<0.01), suggesting that an alternative polyadenylation event and/or miRNA-122 
binding sites may also play a role in controlling gene expression.
It is 
therefore possible that binding of miR-122 to the 3'UTR may cause the depression 
of gene expression, contributing to the lesser level of SLC7A1 and the 
endothelial dysfunction seen in hypertensive subjects.
Taken together, these 
data provide novel insights into the mechanism by which ss52051869 influences 
SLC7A1 gene expression.
2008 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/humu.20891
PMID: 19067360 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of pilocarpine
 oxotremorine and arecoline in combination with methyl-atropine or atropine on hormone activated oestrous behaviour in ovariectomized rats 1.
Psychopharmacologia.
1967 Oct 6;11(5):405-13. doi: 10.1007/BF00405024.
The effect of pilocarpine, oxotremorine and arecoline in combination with 
methyl-atropine or atropine on hormone activated oestrous behaviour in 
ovariectomized rats.
Lindström LH, Meyerson BJ.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00405024
PMID: 5626539 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Possible involvement of cyclic amp-dependent protein kinase in p
p′-ddt-induced changes in hepatic metabolism 1.
Biochem Pharmacol.
1976 Sep 1;25(17):1985-9. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(76)90054-x.
Possible involvement of cyclic AMP-dependent protein kinase in p,p'-DDT-induced 
changes in hepatic metabolism.
Tsang BK, Kaciew S, Singhal RL.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(76)90054-x
PMID: 186071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The inhibition by normal gamma-G-globulins of antibodies specific for individual gamma-G-myeloma proteins. 1. J Immunol. 1968 Jan;100(1):69-79.

The inhibition by normal gamma-G-globulins of antibodies specific for individual 
gamma-G-myeloma proteins.

Hurez D
 Meshaka G, Mihaesco C, Seligmann M.

PMID: 4170427 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sperm quality but not relatedness predicts sperm competition success in threespine sticklebacks (Gasterosteus aculeatus) 1. BMC Evol Biol. 2015 Apr 26;15:74. doi: 10.1186/s12862-015-0353-x.

Sperm quality but not relatedness predicts sperm competition success in 
threespine sticklebacks (Gasterosteus aculeatus).

Mehlis M(1)
 Rahn AK(2), Bakker TC(3).
Author information:
(1)Institute for Evolutionary Biology and Ecology, University of Bonn, An der 
Immenburg 1, D-53121, Bonn, Germany.
mmehlis@evolution.uni-bonn.de.
(2)Institute for Evolutionary Biology and Ecology, University of Bonn, An der 
Immenburg 1, D-53121, Bonn, Germany.
arahn@evolution.uni-bonn.de.
(3)Institute for Evolutionary Biology and Ecology, University of Bonn, An der 
Immenburg 1, D-53121, Bonn, Germany.
t.bakker@uni-bonn.de.
BACKGROUND: Mating between close relatives often leads to a reduction of an 
individual's fitness, due to an increased expression of deleterious alleles.
Thus, in many animal taxa pre- as well as postcopulatory inbreeding avoidance 
mechanisms have evolved.
An increased risk of inbreeding and hence a loss of 
genetic variation may occur during founder events as in most cases only few 
individuals establish a new population.
The threespine stickleback (Gasterosteus 
aculeatus) is a small externally fertilizing fish species subject to strong 
sperm competition.
Sticklebacks inhabit both marine and freshwater environments 
and anadromous populations have repeatedly established new genetically less 
diverse freshwater populations.
Previous studies showed that anadromous 
sticklebacks strongly suffer from inbreeding depression and when given the 
choice females prefer to mate with unrelated males.
RESULTS: The present study aimed to address whether there exists a 
postcopulatory inbreeding avoidance mechanism solely based on sperm-egg 
interactions in sperm competition experiments.
We used F1 individuals that 
originated either from a large, genetically heterogeneous anadromous population 
or from a small, genetically less diverse freshwater population.
For each 
population, eggs of two different females were in vitro fertilized by the same 
two males' sperm in a paired study design.
In the main experiment one male was 
the female's full-sib brother and in the control experiment all individuals were 
unrelated.
The results revealed that fertilization success was independent of 
relatedness in both populations suggesting a general lack of a postcopulatory 
inbreeding avoidance mechanism.
Instead, male quality (i.e.
sperm morphology) 
predicted paternity success during competitive fertilization trials.
CONCLUSION: In sticklebacks, there is no evidence for postcopulatory inbreeding 
avoidance.
Sperm morphology predicted paternity instead, thus sperm quality 
traits are under strong sexual selection, presumably driven by the high risk of 
sperm competition under natural conditions.
DOI: 10.1186/s12862-015-0353-x
PMCID: PMC4415302
PMID: 25928309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Transient Neutralization of Tumor Necrosis Factor Alpha Can Produce a Chronic Fungal Infection in an Immunocompetent Host: Potential Role of Immature Dendritic Cells <jats:title>ABSTRACT</jats:title><jats:p>The mechanisms underlying induction of immune dysregulation and chronic fungal infection by a transient tumor necrosis factor alpha (TNF-α) deficiency remain to be defined. The objective of our studies was to determine the potential contribution of neutropenia and immature dendritic cells to the immune deviation. Administration of an anti-TNF-α monoclonal antibody at day 0 neutralized TNF-α only during the first week of a pulmonary<jats:italic>Cryptococcus neoformans</jats:italic>infection. Transient neutralization of TNF-α resulted in transient depression of interleukin-12 (IL-12)
 monocyte chemotactic protein 1 (MCP-1), and gamma interferon (IFN-γ) production but permanently impaired long-term clearance of the infection from the lungs even after the levels of these cytokines increased and a vigorous inflammatory response developed.
Early neutrophil recruitment was defective in the absence of TNF-α.
However, as demonstrated by neutrophil depletion studies, this did not account for the decrease in IL-12 and IFN-γ levels and did not play a role in establishing chronic pulmonary cryptococcal infection.
Transient TNF-α neutralization also produced a deficiency in CD11c<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>MHC II<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>cells and IL-12 in the lymph nodes, potentially implicating a defect in mature dendritic cell trafficking.
Transfer of cryptococcal antigen-pulsed immature dendritic cells into naïve mice prior to intratracheal challenge resulted in the development of a nonprotective immune response to<jats:italic>C.
neoformans</jats:italic>that was similar to that observed in anti-TNF-α-treated mice (increased IL-4, IL-5, and IL-10 levels, pulmonary eosinophilia, and decreased clearance).
Thus, stimulation of an antifungal response by immature dendritic cells can result in an immune deviation similar to that produced by transient TNF-α deficiency, identifying a new mechanism by which a chronic fungal infection can occur in an immunocompetent host.</jats:p>
Effect of nickel ions on spontaneous
 electrically and norepinephrine stimulated isometric contractions in the isolated portal vein of the rat.
1.
Acta Physiol Acad Sci Hung.
1982;59(2):181-6.
Effect of nickel ions on spontaneous, electrically and norepinephrine stimulated 
isometric contractions in the isolated portal vein of the rat.
Rubányi G, Inovay J.
The effect of low concentrations (1-10 microM) of nickel (Ni2+) was studied on 
the spontaneous contractile activity of isolated rat portal vein preparations.
To distinguish between presynaptic and postsynaptic actions, Ni2+-induced 
changes of isometric force development evoked either by electrical field 
stimulation (80V/5 cm; 1 msec; 1-32 Hz) or by exogenous norepinephrine (NE) were 
compared.
Ni2+ inhibited spontaneous isometric force development, decreased 
basal tone but significantly increased the frequency of contractions.
The 
experimental findings that inhibition of the effect of selective stimulation of 
adrenergic nerves was significantly more pronounced than the depression of 
contractions evoked by exogenous norepinephrine indicate that in addition to 
postsynaptic actions, Ni2+ influences presynaptic mechanisms (i.e.
NE-release) 
in this vessel preparation.
PMID: 7158372 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The influence of thiamin deficiency on the metabolism of the oral contraceptive mestranol [3-methoxy-17-ethynyl-1
3,5(10)-estratrien-17 β-01] by female rat liver enzymes 1.
Steroids.
1977 Aug;30(2):275-83. doi: 10.1016/0039-128x(77)90088-5.
The influence of thiamin deficiency on the metabolism of the oral contraceptive 
mestranol [3-methoxy-17-ethynyl-1,3,5(10)-estratrien-17 beta-o1] by female rat 
liver enzymes.
Wade AE, Evans JS.
Hepatic microsomes from female rats fed a thiamin deficient diet for three weeks 
had approximately three times the capacity to metabolize mestranol as microsomes 
from similar rats fed a diet rich in thiamin.
The incremental addition of 
thiamin to the diet depressed mestranol O-demethylation, NADPH cytochrome c 
reductase, and cytochrome P-450 content in a dose related manner up to 2 
microgram thiamin per gram of feed.
Pair-feeding experiments indicate that 
thiamin ingestion is responsible for the depression of mestranol O-demethylation 
and NADPH cytochrome c reductase activity while carbodhydrate ingestion is 
responsible for the decrease in cytochrome P-450.
The absorbance spectra 
generated by the binding of ethylisocyanide to microsomes yield data which 
suggest that there are no qualitative alterations in cytochrome P-450 due to 
diet.
PIP: The effect of thiamin deficiency on the metabolism of the oral 
contraceptive mestranol by female rat liver enzymes was determined.
Rats were 
fed a diet for 3 weeks containing 0, .3, .7, 2.0, or 20 mcg thiamin/gm food 
before decapitation and extraction of liver microsomes.
Mestranol was incubated 
with 1 ml microsomes from 250 mg liver and the metabolic reaction started by 
addition of cofactors and NADPH.
Liver microsomes from rats fed a 
thiamin-deficient diet had 3 times the capacity to metabolize mestranol as 
microsomes from rats fed a thiamin-rich diet.
The incremental addition of 
thiamin to the diet depressed mestranol 0-demethylation, NADPH cytochrome c 
reductase, and cytochrome P-450 content.
Pair-feeding experiments indicate that 
the carbohydrate portion of the food is responsible for decrease in cytochrome 
c, while thiamin levels are responsible for changes in the other 2.
DOI: 10.1016/0039-128x(77)90088-5
PMID: 412282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Structure-activity relationships of the thienothiazine derivatives with their antiinflammatory
 analgesic and ulcerogenic effects and their inhibitory effects on PGE2.
biosynthesis.
1.
Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi.
1989 Jul;94(1):61-71. doi: 10.1254/fpj.94.61.
[Structure-activity relationships of the thienothiazine derivatives with their 
antiinflammatory, analgesic and ulcerogenic effects and their inhibitory effects 
on PGE2 biosynthesis].
[Article in Japanese]

Tanaka Y(1), Himori N.

Author information:
(1)Nippon Roche Research Center, Kamakura, Japan.
A new series of thienothiazine derivatives were evaluated as a means of 
clarifying whether the changed chemical structure would have a different effect 
on carrageenin edema, scalded hyperalgesia and ulcerogenicity in rats and also 
have a different effect on PGE2 biosynthesis in vitro.
The introduction of a Cl 
or CF3 group, but not an OH group, into position 6 of the thiophene ring 
resulted in an apparent increase in antiinflammatory and analgesic activity.
A 
derivative with an OH or ester substituent in position 4 of the thiazine ring 
had a high pharmacological potential, but the introduction of other substituents 
such as ether and amide led to a significant loss in the activity.
The 
pharmacological potential of two 5-hydroxy-2-aminopyridyl derivatives was less 
than what was achieved with various 2-aminopyridyl derivatives.
Good 
correlations were observed between the lessening of the carrageenin edema and 
scalded hyperalgesia and inhibition of PGE2 biosynthesis.
There was no 
statistically significant correlation between the ulcerogenicity and 
anti-inflammation or the ulcerogenicity and analgesia.
As to the safety, 
tenoxicam, IIIc and IIIh showed relatively higher indices than those of others; 
and especially, tenoxicam was found to be a potent antiinflammatory drug with 
the highest safety index.
DOI: 10.1254/fpj.94.61
PMID: 2792962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In vitro uptake of oestradiol in DMBA induced breast tumours of the rat. 1. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand. 1969;75(4):520-6.

In vitro uptake of oestradiol in DMBA induced breast tumours of the rat.

Sander S.

PMID: 5393698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Effects of Antiandrogen TZP-4238 on Plasma Testosterone and LH
 and Steroidgenesis in Rat and Canine Testis 1.
Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi.
1995 Jul 20;71(5):679-94. doi: 
10.1507/endocrine1927.71.5_679.
[The effects of antiandrogen TZP-4238 on plasma testosterone and LH and 
steroidogenesis in rat and canine testis].
[Article in Japanese]

Honma S(1), Takezawa Y, Yamanaka H.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacokinetics Research Department, Teikoku Hormone Mfg.
Co. LTD, Kawasaki, 
Japan.
TZP-4238 suppresses plasma testosterone in humans, but its action on the 
androgen biosynthesis pathway has not been established.
Therefore, we researched 
the testicular testosterone level and the testosterone biosynthesis pathway in 
vitro in rats before and after receiving a single or continuous oral dose of 
TZP-4238.
The total testosterone fell to 60% of the basal level within 3-8 hr (p 
< 0.05) and then returned to the control concentration by 24 hr after a single 
administration of 32 mg/kg.
The alteration of the plasma testosterone level 
correlated well with that of the intratesticular level, which was decreased to 
50% at 3-8 hr and recovered to the control level by 24 hr.
However, the 
decrement of the plasma LH level at 3-8 hr after a single oral administration 
was slight and it then returned to the original level at 12 hr.
During the 8 
weeks of daily administration of 0.5 mg/kg of TZP-4238 or chlormadinone acetate 
to dogs, the plasma testosterone levels were slightly lower than the basal 
extent.
In vitro experiments were conducted on the rat testis using the 
exogenous precursor steroids 20 alpha-hydroxycholesterol, pregnenolone and 
progesterone, in various steps leading to the biosynthesis of testosterone.
Trilostane acted at 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (50% inhibition 
concentration, IC50 was 1 microM), ketoconazole inhibited the 17 
alpha-hydroxylase, and C20, 22- and C17, 20-lyase activities, with an IC50 of 
1-50 microM.
Cyproterone acetate inhibited both the 3 beta-hydroxysteroid 
dehydrogenase (IC50;50 microM) and C17, 20-lyase.
On the other hand, TZP-4238 
exhibited a weaker inhibition of 3 beta-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase (IC50; 100 
microM) than cyproterone acetate, but not of hydroxylase and lyase.
Though 
TZP-4238 did not inhibit the increased testosterone level induced by hCG, 
trilostane markedly inhibited the effect induced by hCG.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 
250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1507/endocrine1927.71.5_679
PMID: 7556779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of pregnancy and endothelial cell removal on α‐adrenoceptor‐mediated responses of rat thoracic aortae 1. J Auton Pharmacol. 1990 Dec;10(6):353-62. doi: 
10.1111/j.1474-8673.1990.tb00035.x.

Effects of pregnancy and endothelial cell removal on alpha-adrenoceptor-mediated 
responses of rat thoracic aortae.

Jansakul C(1)
 King RG.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Monash University, Clayton, Victoria, Australia.
1.
The possibility was examined that changes in sensitivity of the aorta to 
alpha-adrenoceptor agonists during pregnancy in the rat are due to changes in 
smooth muscle receptor-mediated responses and/or endothelial cell-mediated 
responses.
2.
Maximum constrictor responses to phenylephrine (PE) of both 
endothelium-intact and denuded thoracic aortic rings were greater when tissues 
were obtained from 20-day pregnant rats compared with non-pregnant ones.
For 
endothelium-denuded thoracic aortic rings, the pA2 value for phentolamine as an 
antagonist of PE was not significantly different for rings from 20-day pregnant 
rats compared with rings from non-pregnant rats.
3.
Prazosin (1-50 nM) markedly 
depressed maximum contractile responses to PE of endothelium-intact (but not 
denuded) thoracic aortic rings from both non-pregnant and 20-day pregnant rats.
However, this marked depression of maximum responses by prazosin did not occur 
in the additional presence of yohimbine (10 nM), and yohimbine alone (10-500 mM) 
did not affect maximum responses to PE.
There was no significant difference 
between the pA2 value for prazosin against PE-induced contractions of 
endothelium-denuded aortic rings obtained from either non-pregnant or 20-day 
pregnant rats (in the presence of yohimbine, 10 nM).
4.
These results provide no 
evidence for a change in aortic smooth muscle alpha-adrenoceptor affinity during 
pregnancy, although maximum responsiveness of aortic smooth muscle to PE is 
increased on day 20 of pregnancy (c.f.
non-pregnant controls).
DOI: 10.1111/j.1474-8673.1990.tb00035.x
PMID: 1982669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
An Attempt to Select for Increased Longevity in &lt;i&gt;Drosophila melanogaster&lt;/i&gt; 1. Gerontology. 1979;25(4):192-204. doi: 10.1159/000212340.

An attempt to select for increased longevity in Drosophila melanogaster.

Lints FA
 Stoll J, Gruwez G, Lints CV.
Eight generations of selection towards a higher longevity were made in a wild 
strain of Drosophila melanogaster.
Two control lines were also observed.
Absolutely no response to selection was obtained whilst a major increase in 
longevity occurred between F2 and F4 in the three lines under observation.
It is 
shown that the major increase in longevity is due neither to genetic drift, nor 
to changes in classical environmental conditions.
The absence of response to 
selection is demonstrated to be due neither to a too low selection differential, 
nor to the absence of genetic variability in the strain, nor to inaccuracy in 
the measurements, nor to recurrent reproduction at an old age.
The impossibility 
to select towards a higher longevity and the total absence of relation between 
parental and offspring longevities demonstrate that the very large phenotypic 
variability displayed by longevity in wild strains of D. melanogaster does not 
depend on a precise set of specific genes or polygenes with additive action.
The 
results are briefly discussed in relation with inbreeding depression and 
heterosis for longevity and with similar results obtained in experiments of 
selection for duration of development.
DOI: 10.1159/000212340
PMID: 110657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Neuraminidase on Lymphoid Cells <jats:p>After neuraminidase treatment the electrophoretic mobility of mouse lymphocytes (B and T cells) and thymocytes was reduced to a similar value
 .a diminution of about 40%, 60%, and 40%, respectively.
Thus B and T cells and thymocytes may have a common surface charge after removal of sialic acid.
The percentage of cells binding anti‐thymocyte serum was not changed; thus sialic acid does not seem to be an important part of the specific antigen of lymphoid cells.
Similar amounts of sialic acid were released from B and T Ceils, whereas less than half of this was released from the thymocytes.
Thus, whereas thymocytes are characterized by their low electrophoretic mobility and low sialic acid release and T cells by high electrophoretic mobility and high sialic acid release, B‐cells in contrast show a low electrophoretic mobility and high sialic acid release.</jats:p>
Protonentransport durch Mitochondrienmembranen unterl-Palmitoylcarnitin 1. Naturwissenschaften. 1967 Mar;54(6):143. doi: 10.1007/BF00625116.

[Proton transport by mitochondrial membranes under the influence of 
L-palmitoylcarnitine].

[Article in German]

Dargel R
 Strack E.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00625116
PMID: 5584636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Impairment of macrophage eicosanoid and nitric oxide production by an alkaloid from Sinomenium acutum. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1994 Nov;44(11):1223-6.

Impairment of macrophage eicosanoid and nitric oxide production by an alkaloid 
from Sinomenium acutum.

Liu L(1)
 Riese J, Resch K, Kaever V.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Pharmacology, Medical School Hannover, Fed.
Rep. of 
Germany.
The effects of sinomenine (7,8-didehydro-4-hydroxy-3,7-dimethoxy-17-methyl- 9 
alpha,13 alpha,14 alpha-morphinan-6-one), a pure alkaloid extracted from the 
Chinese medical plant Sinomenium acutum, on different macrophage capacities were 
investigated in vitro using resident mouse peritoneal macrophages and the 
macrophage-like cell line RAW 264.7.
Sinomenine markedly decreased prostaglandin 
E2 and leukotriene C4 synthesis of macrophages stimulated by zymosan or calcium 
ionophore and also significantly inhibited the nitric oxide production of RAW 
264.7 cells activated by interferon-gamma/lipopolysaccharide.
It can be 
considered that these effects are part of the analgesic, anti-inflammatory, and 
antirheumatic mechanisms of sinomenine.
PMID: 7848335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of Connective Tissue Proliferation by Dermal Extract 1. J Invest Dermatol. 1978 Sep;71(3):172-6. doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12547084.

Inhibition of connective tissue proliferation by dermal extract.

Hanks CT
 Smith EO.
Following the subcutaneous injection of a water soluble dermal extract (DE) of 
neonatal rat skin into young adult male rats, depression of nuclear labeling 
(DNA synthesis) was observed in proliferating connective tissue in several wound 
sites.
At 16--20 hr following DE injection, DNA synthesis was depressed most in 
back wounds (57--87%) and maxillary palatal wounds (45--68%), and least in ear 
wounds (24--29%).
Epithelium in the wound margins of back, ear and palate did 
not show a similar depression in DE-injected animals.
This study suggests that a 
chalone-like negative feedback mechanism may be partially responsible for in 
vivo control of fibroblastic proliferation in wound healing.
DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12547084
PMID: 690479 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
INTERACTION OF COCAINE WITH CHLORDIAZEPOXIDE ASSESSED BY MOTOR ACTIVITY IN MICE <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Effects of a range of doses of cocaine and chlordiazepoxide given separately and as mixtures were determined on the spontaneous locomotor activity of mice.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Cocaine increased locomotor activity (walking) during 3 or 5 min trials in a dose‐related manner.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Chlordiazepoxide had little effect on the total amount of locomotor activity except for depression at very high doses. A lower dose of chlordiazepoxide increased activity at the beginning of the trials only.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Mixtures containing certain doses of cocaine and chlordiazepoxide increased locomotor activity to a much greater extent than cocaine alone. This high level of activity was manifested throughout 5 min trials.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>This action of cocaine is similar to that of amphetamine.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Effect of Cromakalim (BRL 34915) on hemodynamic and electrocardiographic changes induced by endothelin in dogs 1. Basic Res Cardiol. 1991 Jan-Feb;86(1):49-55. doi: 10.1007/BF02193871.

Effect of cromakalim (BRL 34915) on hemodynamic and electrocardiographic changes 
induced by endothelin in dogs.

Tsunetoshi T(1)
 Otsuka A, Mikami H, Katahira K, Moriguchi A, Ogihara T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Geriatric Medicine, Osaka University Medical School, Japan.
We evaluated whether cromakalim (BRL 34915), a vasorelaxant agent which acts by 
opening potassium channels, could affect the systemic effects of endothelin, a 
newly discovered vasoconstrictive peptide.
Intravenous administration of 
endothelin alone (400 pmol/kg) to anesthetized dogs produced blood pressure 
elevation, which was associated with an increase in cardiac output in the early 
phase, and was associated with an increase in total peripheral resistance in the 
late phase.
Electrocardiogram showed significant ST-elevation in II, III, and 
aVF, and ST-depression in aVR and aVL.
The same dose of endothelin given to dogs 
pretreated with cromakalim did not induce these hemodynamic and 
electrocardiographic changes.
Thus, cromakalim, a potassium activator, inhibited 
the hemodynamic and electrocardiographic actions of endothelin, suggesting that 
hyperpolarization due to potassium channel activation inhibited the 
voltage-dependent calcium channel, which is thought to be a major mechanism for 
the pressor action of endothelin.
DOI: 10.1007/BF02193871
PMID: 1850597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of acute and chronic treatment of tandamine
 a new heterocyclic antidepressant, on biogenic amine metabolism and related activities 1.
Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol.
1979 Sep;308(3):239-47. doi: 
10.1007/BF00501388.
Effect of acute and chronic treatment of tandamine, a new heterocyclic 
antidepressant, on biogenic amine metabolism and related activities.
Pugsley TA, Lippmann W.

The effects of tandamine, a clinically effective heterocyclic antidepressant, 
administered either acutely (10 mg/kg i.p.)
or chronically (10 mg/kg i.p.
daily 
for 21 days) on biogenic amine uptake and metabolism in the rat were determined 
and a comparison with desipramine was made.
Tandamine, similarly to desipramine, 
blocked norepinephrine (NE) uptake in rat brain and heart following both acute 
and chronic administration.
No effect of tandamine on dopamine (DA) or serotonin 
(5-HT) uptake was observed.
Both drugs lowered endogenous brain NE when given 
chronically but not acutely.
In contrast, no such effect on brain DA and 5-HT or 
heart NE was observed.
Tandamine, like desipramine, administered chronically 
prior to an intraventricular injection of 3H-NE, produced increases in the 
decline of 3H-NE as indicated by decreased 3H-NE with increased levels of 
3H-normetanephrine in brain stem of rats, suggesting an increased turnover of 
NE.
No such effect was observed following acute treatment.
Both drugs increased 
the behavioural effects of L-Dopa following and acute oral administration, with 
tandamine appearing superior to desipramine at the lower dose examined (10 
mg/kg).
Tandamine was 57--833 times less effective in binding to rat brain 
muscarinic receptors than desipramine, imipramine, butriptyline and 
amitriptyline, respectively.
Thus, tandamine affects biogenic amine mechanism 
following either acute or chronic administration in a fashion similar to 
desipramine, but unlike desipramine, it exhibits relatively little 
anticholinergic properties, a further indication of the potential use of 
tandamine in the treatment of human depression, particularly where an increase 
in drive is desired.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00501388
PMID: 503251 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of histones
 protamine and actinomycin D and synthesis of brain RNA].
1.
Vopr Med Khim.
1969 Sep-Oct;15(5):532-5.
[Effect of histones, protamine and actinomycin D and synthesis of brain RNA].
[Article in Russian]

Ashmarin IP, Abenirova EL.
PMID: 5368091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Contribution of NHE-1 to cell length shortening of normal and failing rabbit cardiac myocytes 1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2006 Oct;41(4):706-15. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2006.07.001. 
Epub 2006 Aug 17.

Contribution of NHE-1 to cell length shortening of normal and failing rabbit 
cardiac myocytes.

van Borren MM(1)
 Zegers JG, Baartscheer A, Ravesloot JH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Amsterdam, Academic Medical Center, 
Meibergdreef 15, 1105 AZ Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
m.m.vanborren@amc.uva.nl

At the same intracellular pH (pHi) Na+/H+ exchange (NHE-1) fluxes of ventricular 
myocytes of hypertrophied failing hearts (HFH) are increased.
We assessed how 
NHE-1 affected cell length shortening.
pHi was measured fluorimetrically in 
resting and twitching (1-3 Hz) normal and HFH rabbit myocytes.
In HEPES-buffered 
solutions, increased NHE-1 fluxes (P=0.001, n=14) made HFH resting pHi 
0.2+/-0.03 units more alkaline than control (n=27).
In CO2/HCO3--buffered 
solutions, HFH resting pHi was not different (7.05+/-0.02, n=30).
Twitching 
myocytes of both groups shortened 15-16% less per 0.1 pH unit acidification.
In 
HEPES-buffered solutions, cariporide depressed cell length shortening of normal 
myocytes (1-3 Hz) by 16+/-5.4% (n=9, P=0.005).
In HFH myocytes cariporide 
restored the positive force-frequency relationship (n=7, P=0.009), by depressing 
twitch amplitudes at 1 Hz (16+/-11%, P=0.047) but not at 2 and 3 Hz.
The 
depressions were all caused by pHi acidification.
In CO2/HCO3- buffered 
solutions the cariporide-induced acidification was too small to explain the cell 
length shortening depression of normal (19+/-5.0%, n=11, P=0.006) and HFH 
myocytes (14+/-4.7%, n=11, P=0.001).
When compared to HEPES-buffered solutions, 
HFH myocytes in CO2/HCO3--buffered solutions shortened 12+/-6.8% better than 
expected given the 0.16+/-0.02 units more acidic pHi's at which they twitched.
We conclude that in CO2/HCO3--buffered solutions NHE-1 improved cell length 
shortening of unstretched normal and HFH myocytes via a pHi-independent 
mechanism.
Although NHE-1 was increased in HFH myocytes, the magnitude of the 
pHi-independent effect of NHE-1 inhibition on cell length shortening was similar 
in both groups.
DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2006.07.001
PMID: 16916522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inbreeding Depression and Male Survivorship in Drosophila: Implications for Senescence Theory <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>The extent to which inbreeding depression affects longevity and patterns of survivorship is an important issue from several research perspectives
 including evolutionary biology, conservation biology, and the genetic analysis of quantitative traits.
However, few previous inbreeding depression studies have considered longevity as a focal life-history trait.
We maintained laboratory populations of Drosophila melanogaster at census population sizes of 2 and 10 male-female pairs for up to 66 generations and performed repeated assays of male survivorship throughout this time period.
On average, significant levels of inbreeding depression were observed for median life span and age-specific mortality.
For age-specific mortality, the severity of inbreeding depression increased over the life span.
We found that a baseline inbreeding load of 0.307 lethal equivalents per gamete affected age-specific mortality, and that this value increased at a rate of 0.046 per day of the life span.
With respect to some survivorship parameters, the differentiation of lineages was nonlinear with respect to the inbreeding coefficient, which suggested that nonadditive genetic variation contributed to variation among lineages.
These findings provide insights into the genetic basis of longevity as a quantitative trait and have implications regarding the mutation-accumulation evolutionary explanation of senescence.</jats:p>
[Conditions for development of spreading cortical depression during application of direct current]. 1. Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlova. 1976 May-Jun;26(3):647-50.

[Conditions for development of spreading cortical depression during application 
of direct current].

[Article in Russian]

Kuznetsov GD.

PMID: 941516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Can molecular imprinting explain heterozygote deficiency and hybrid vigor? <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>Molecular imprinting
 the phenomenon of differential expressions of a gene based on whether it is paternally or maternally derived, has been noted in mice, humans, and other nonmammalian organisms.
Effects of differential imprinting are important not only in the study of the manifestation of deleterious genes; they have important evolutionary implications as well.
It is shown here that molecular imprinting may mimic observations that are often construed to be due to hybrid vigor and/or inbreeding depression.
Furthermore, if a locus undergoes differential imprinting, it also yields observed genotypic proportions which mimic heterozygote deficiency in the population without the aid of natural selection.</jats:p>
Kinetics of onset of rate-dependent effects of Class I antiarrhythmic drugs are important in determining their effects on refractoriness in guinea-pig ventricle
 and provide a theoretical basis for their subclassification 1.
Cardiovasc Res.
1983 Jun;17(6):344-52. doi: 10.1093/cvr/17.6.344.
Kinetics of onset of rate-dependent effects of Class I antiarrhythmic drugs are 
important in determining their effects on refractoriness in guinea-pig 
ventricle, and provide a theoretical basis for their subclassification.
Campbell TJ.
The kinetics of onset of rate-dependent depression of maximum rate of 
depolarisation (Vmax) of guinea-pig ventricular action potentials were studied 
for nine Class I anti-arrhythmic drugs using standard microelectrode techniques.
The drugs were found to fall into three well-demarcated subgroups with "fast" 
(lignocaine, tocainide and mexiletine), "intermediate" (quinidine, disopyramide 
and procainamide) and "slow" (flecainide, encainide and lorcainide) kinetics.
The "fast" drugs were found to share the ability to markedly prolong the 
effective refractory period (ERP) relative to the action potential duration 
(APD).
The "slow" drugs had only minor effects on this parameter.
The 
"intermediate" drugs produced small to moderate increases in ERP relative to APD 
but in addition significantly prolonged APD, which was shortened by the "fast" 
drugs.
Thus, using the parameters of speed of onset of rate-dependent depression 
of Vmax and APD it was possible to subdivide the nine Class I drugs into three 
distinct subclasses.
DOI: 10.1093/cvr/17.6.344
PMID: 6883410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of intravenous mannitol or oral glycerol on intraocular pressure in dogs. 1. Cornell Vet. 1989 Jul;79(3):249-58.

The effect of intravenous mannitol or oral glycerol on intraocular pressure in 
dogs.

Lorimer DW(1)
 Hakanson NE, Pion PD, Merideth RE.
Author information:
(1)Eye Clinic for Animals, Tucson, AZ 85712.
The effect of IV mannitol (1.5 gm/kg) or oral glycerol (1.4 and 2.0 gm/kg) on 
intraocular pressure (IOP) and serum osmolality (SOSM) was investigated in 24 
normal dogs.
Mean IOPs were significantly decreased from baseline values from 
0.5 through 5.5 hours following mannitol administration with a mean maximum 
depression of 8.7 +/- 1.8 mm Hg whereas mean SOSM was significantly increased 
from baseline values.
Mean IOPs were significantly decreased from baseline 
values from 1.0 through 10 hours following oral administration of 1.4 gm/kg 
glycerol with a mean maximal depression of 5.4 +/- 2.7 mm Hg.
Mean SOSM 
increased initially followed by a significant decrease.
The change in IOP 
following mannitol administration showed less variation (smaller standard 
deviations) than glycerol (1.4 gm/kg).
Five of the 6 dogs that received the 2.0 
gm/kg glycerol vomited; the mean IOP and SOSM values were not significantly 
altered from baseline values in these dogs.
Four of 5 dogs given cooled (10C) 
2.0 gm/kg glycerol vomited.
The incidence of vomiting appeared to be dose 
related.
Both mannitol and glycerol (1.4 gm/kg) are effective for decreasing IOP 
in normal dogs.
PMID: 2502361 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on variations of morphologically identifiable bone marrow cells in myelosuppressed mice. 1. In Vivo. 1994 Nov-Dec;8(6):1033-9.

Effect of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor on variations 
of morphologically identifiable bone marrow cells in myelosuppressed mice.

Kabaya K(1)
 Kusaka M, Seki M.

Author information:
(1)Pharmaceutical Research Laboratory, Kirin Brewery Co., Ltd., Gunma, Japan.
To examine the effects of recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor (rhG-CSF) on neutrophilic recovery after cytotoxic agents, the variations 
of marrow colony-forming units of granulocytes and macrophages (CFU-GM) and 
morphologically identifiable bone marrow cells were investigated in 
cyclophosphamide (CPA)-treated mice.
In mice treated with CPA at 200mg/kg 
intraperitoneally (day 0), marked decreases in peripheral neutrophils and 
nucleated cells in the femur were observed.
In the femur of mice treated with 
CPA, the greatest depression in number occurred firstly with CFU-GM and the most 
immature granulocytes, such as myeloblasts and promyelocytes, followed in turn 
by myelocytes, metamyelocytes and mature neutrophils.
Administration of rhG-CSF 
for four successive days (days 1-4) after CPA treatment completely prevented the 
neutropenia.
In the femur, rhG-CSF enhanced the recovery of progenitors and 
immature granulocytes from their depression in the order of their 
differentiation, and recovery of marrow neutrophils was also promoted.
From 
these studies, we confirmed that rhG-CSF effects an increase in peripheral 
neutrophils by enhancing the proliferation and differentiation of CFU-GM and 
immature marrow granulocytes.
PMID: 7539636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of the renin-angiotensin system in drinking of seawater-adapted eels<i>Anguilla japonica</i>: a reevaluation <jats:p>The role of ANG II
 a potent dipsogenic hormone, in copious drinking of seawater eels was examined.
SQ-14225 (SQ), an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, infused intra-arterially at 0.01–1 μg · kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>· min<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>, depressed drinking and arterial blood pressure in a dose-dependent manner.
The inhibition was accompanied by a small decrease in plasma ANG II concentration, which became significant at 1 μg · kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>· min<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>.
After the infusate was changed back to the vehicle, the depression of drinking and arterial pressure continued for &gt;2 h, although plasma ANG II concentration rebounded above the level before SQ infusion.
By contrast, infusion of anti-ANG II serum (0.01–1 μg · kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>· min<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>) did not suppress drinking and arterial pressure, although plasma ANG II concentration decreased to undetectable levels.
Plasma atrial natriuretic peptide and plasma osmolality, which influence drinking rate in eels, did not change during SQ or antiserum infusions.
These results suggest that the renin-angiotensin system plays only a minor role in the vigorous drinking observed in seawater eels.
The results also suggest that the antidipsogenic and vasodepressor effects of SQ in seawater eels are not due solely to the inhibition of ANG II formation in plasma.</jats:p>
Sex Differences in the Regulation of Serotonergic Transmission and Behavior in 5-HT Receptor Knockout Mice 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2005 Jun;30(6):1039-47. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300664.

Sex differences in the regulation of serotonergic transmission and behavior in 
5-HT receptor knockout mice.

Jones MD(1)
 Lucki I.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, 415 Curie Boulevard, 
Philadelphia, PA 19104, USA.
Few studies have examined the relationship between genetics, stress, and 
sex-linked differences in neurotransmitter systems.
Examining serotonin (5-HT) 
receptor knockout mice on stress-induced behavioral depression, female 5-HT1B 
receptor knockout mice demonstrated significantly reduced immobility than either 
male 5-HT1B receptor knockout mice or male and female wild-type mice on the tail 
suspension test (TST) and forced swimming test.
The behavioral phenotype was 
identified as likely due to a disinhibition of 5-HT release, because depletion 
of 5-HT with parachlorophenylalanine selectively reduced immobility of female 
5-HT1B receptor knockout mice in the TST.
In contrast, male and female 5-HT1A 
receptor knockout mice demonstrated reduced immobility compared with control 
mice, but the depletion of 5-HT with PCPA did not reverse the 
antidepressant-like phenotype.
Microdialysis studies confirmed significantly 
higher baseline levels of hippocampal 5-HT in female, but not male, 5-HT1B 
receptor knockout mice.
Both male and female 5-HT1B receptor knockout mice 
demonstrated augmented dialysate responses to fluoxetine.
Also, both male and 
female 5-HT1B receptor knockout mice demonstrated reductions of immobility in 
the TST after treatment with fluoxetine.
Therefore, female 5-HT1B receptor 
knockout mice demonstrate a sex-linked disinhibition of 5-HT release that 
sustained higher baseline levels of hippocampal 5-HT and behavioral 
vulnerability to 5-HT depletion.
DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300664
PMID: 15688089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Simultaneous Heat and Tension Measurements from Single Muscle Cells 1. Adv Exp Med Biol. 1984;170:887-99. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4684-4703-3_87.

Simultaneous heat and tension measurements from single muscle cells.

Curtin NA
 Howarth JV, Rall JA, Wilson MG, Woledge RC.
Simultaneous force and heat measurements were made in single cells from skeletal 
muscle of the frog during isometric twitches and tetani at 10 and 0 degree C. A 
Hill- Downing type thermopile of low heat capacity was used.
In twitches, peak 
force development was found to be well correlated with heat production at both 
temperatures, during posttetanic twitch potentiation (at 10 degrees C) and 
during posttetanic twitch depression (at 0 degree C).
In a twitch at 0 degree C, 
heat production started less than 14 msec after the stimulus had begun, before 
force development.
As in whole muscle, the heat during a tetanus could be 
separated into two components: an early component produced at an exponentially 
decreasing rate, labile heat, and a steady rate, stable maintenance heat rate.
Increasing temperature from 0 to 10 degrees C doubled the stable maintenance 
heat rate.
At the higher temperature the time constant of labile heat production 
was halved and the quantity of labile heat decreased.
When two tetani were given 
at 10 degrees C, a 5 min rest interval was required before the second tetanus 
produced the same force and heat as the first.
At 0 degree C this interval was 
at least 10 min.
With shorter intervals, both heat and force were depressed.
At 
10 degrees C both were depressed equally but at 0 degree C the effect on heat 
was greater than on force.
At both temperatures labile heat was depressed to a 
greater extent than the stable maintenance heat rate.
Results are interpreted in 
terms of possible calcium-parvalbumin interaction during a tetanus.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4684-4703-3_87
PMID: 6611044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Acute administration of the novel serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitor
 S33005, markedly modifies sleep–wake cycle architecture in the rat 1.
Psychopharmacology (Berl).
2005 Oct;181(4):639-52. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-005-0016-5.
Epub 2005 Sep 29.
Acute administration of the novel serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake 
inhibitor, S33005, markedly modifies sleep-wake cycle architecture in the rat.
Cespuglio R(1), Rousset C, Debilly G, Rochat C, Millan MJ.
Author information:
(1)EA 3734 & IFR19, C. Bernard Univ., 8 av.
Rockefeller, 69373, Lyon Cedex 08, 
France.
cespuglio@univ-lyon1.fr

RATIONALE: The interrelationship between depressive states and sleep-wake cycle 
architecture is characterised by a decreased latency to the first paradoxical 
sleep (PS) episode, together with an enhancement of PS during the first part of 
the night.
Conversely, slow-wave sleep (SWS) is decreased and intermittent 
awakenings increased.
Notably, antidepressant treatment is generally associated 
with a diminution of PS.
OBJECTIVES: In light of these observations, we examined the influence of acute 
administration of the novel mixed serotonin-noradrenaline reuptake blocker, 
(-)1-(1-dimethylaminomethyl 5-methoxybenzocyclobutan-1-yl)-cyclohexanol HCl 
(S33005), upon sleep-wake architecture in rats.
METHODS: Animals were injected with vehicle or incremental doses of S33005 at 
the onset of either the dark or light periods.
Digitised polygraphic recordings 
were performed, and changes evoked by S33005 were determined over 24-h recording 
periods, i.e., number and duration of sleep-wake episodes, latencies to PS and 
SWS, power band spectra of the electroencephalogram (EEG) and circadian changes.
RESULTS: At 0.04 mg/kg, S33005 was inactive, whereas at 0.63 mg/kg, it modestly 
increased PS latencies and diminished PS duration during the light period.
At 10 
mg/kg, S33005 reduced markedly PS duration for about 4-h when injected prior to 
both light and dark periods.
Latency to PS was prolonged, and the circadian 
acrophase was delayed.
These effects are in keeping with previous studies of 
monoamine reuptake inhibitors, but, notably, SWS duration was increased when 
S33005 was injected at the onset of the light phase (+4%).
These changes 
occurred without marked modifications in circadian rhythmicity or EEG spectral 
band power.
Finally, even at the highest dose of S33005, only a limited rebound 
of SWS (+5%) and PS (+10%) was apparent.
Amongst antidepressant to date 
examined, this is an original profile of influence upon sleep patterns.
CONCLUSIONS: These results demonstrate a pattern of influence of S33005 upon 
sleep-wake architecture in rats which is globally consistent with antidepressant 
properties, but with a distinctive enhancement of restorative slow-wave sleep.
DOI: 10.1007/s00213-005-0016-5
PMID: 15983796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
HEPATIC DRUG METABOLISM AND HAEM BIOSYNTHESIS IN LEAD‐POISONED RATS <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Pretreatment of rats with intraperitoneal injections of lead was shown to result in a depression of the microsomal mixed function oxidase system
 as assessed by a decrease in hepatic microsomal P‐450 and b<jats:sub>5</jats:sub> content and by a decrease in the activity of the enzymes aniline hydroxylase and aminopyrine demethylase.
Lead had a more marked effect on cytochrome P‐450 than b<jats:sub>5</jats:sub>.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The activity of the rate‐limiting enzyme of haem biosynthesis, δ‐aminolaevulinic acid synthase, was inversely correlated with the microsomal cytochrome P‐450 content.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The activity of the haem biosynthetic enzymes δ‐aminolaevulinic acid dehydratase, coproporphyrinogen oxidase and ferrochelatase were decreased by increasing lead pretreatment.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The activity of the haem catabolic enzyme, haem oxygenase, was increased by lead pretreatment.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Effect of the potassium-channel opener nicorandil as an adjunct to cardioplegia on myocardial preservation in isolated rabbit hearts 1. Surg Today. 1996;26(10):782-92. doi: 10.1007/BF00311637.

Effect of the potassium-channel opener nicorandil as an adjunct to cardioplegia 
on myocardial preservation in isolated rabbit hearts.

Wang Y(1)
 Sunamori M, Yoshida T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Thoracic-Cardiovascular Surgery, School of Medicine, Tokyo 
Medical and Dental University, Japan.
We studied the effect of nicorandil on the hemodynamic, biochemical, and 
ultrastructural changes in rabbit hearts (n = 50) rendered cardioplegic with a 
single injection of Bretschneider's HTK solution over 30 min or 60 min at 37 
degrees C or 15 degrees C, followed by reperfusion at 37 degrees C for 60 min.
Particular attention was focused on the aspects of dose-response relationship, 
temperature sensitivity, and ischemic tolerance.
Isolated hearts were prepared 
for modified Langendorff circulation using modified Krebs-Henseleit bicarbonate 
solution bubbled with a 95% O2(-5)% CO2 gas mixture, to which nicorandil (0, 
0.1, 1, and 5 mM) was added.
The optimal concentration of nicorandil was 1mM, 
which increased the recovery of left ventricular (LV) function, affecting 
coronary flow and the myocardial cyclic adenosine monophosphate, but not the 
myocardial concentrations of adenine nucleotide compounds or total calcium.
These effects were abolished by the addition of glibenclamide to the HTK, but 
they were not diminished by a high potassium (K+) concentration of 20mM.
The 
addition of nicorandil 1mM to the HTK at 15 degrees C did not improve the 
recovery of LV function.
Our result suggested that nicorandil used adjunctly 
prevents LV functional depression after 30min, and possibly 60min of 
cardioplegia at 37 degrees C, and that this effect is not disturbed by a high K+ 
concentration up to 20 mM.
However, nicorandil has temperature sensitivity 
whereby it loses its efficacy at 15 degrees C.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00311637
PMID: 8897676 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The influence of intraneuronal monoamine oxidase on neuronal net uptake of noradrenaline and on sensitivity to noradrenaline. 1. Adv Biochem Psychopharmacol. 1972;5:371-7.

The influence of intraneuronal monoamine oxidase on neuronal net uptake of 
noradrenaline and on sensitivity to noradrenaline.

Trendelenburg U
 Draskóczy PR, Graefe KH.
PMID: 5054208 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Comparative cardiac contractile actions of six narcotic analgesics: morphine
 meperidine, pentazocine, fentanyl, methadone and l-alpha-acetylmethadol (LAAM).
1.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther.
1980 Oct;215(1):259-65.
Comparative cardiac contractile actions of six narcotic analgesics: morphine, 
meperidine, pentazocine, fentanyl, methadone and l-alpha-acetylmethadol (LAAM).
Rendig SV, Amsterdam EA, Henderson GL, Mason DT.
Cardiac muscle contractile responses to six narcotic analgesics (morphine, 
meperidine, pentazocine, fentanyl, methadone and l-alpha-acetylmethadol), at 
concentrations from 10(-8) to 10(-4) M, both in the presence and absence of the 
narcotic antagonist, naloxone, were studied in the isolated, isometric cat right 
ventricular papillary muscle preparation.
Measurements of maximum developed 
tension (T), maximum rate of tension development (dT/dt) and time to peak 
tension indicated that no major changes in contractile function occurred with 
any narcotic at concentrations of 10(-8) to 10(-6) M except for small but 
significant (P < .05) increases in all three parameters at 10(-6) M fentanyl, 
and small but significant increases in dT/dt at 10(-8) to 10(-6) M meperidine.
At 10(-5) M narcotic, dT/dt was significantly elevated in meperidine-treated 
muscles (+7%), but significantly reduced in muscles exposed to pentazocine (-8%) 
or l-alpha-acetylmethadol (-11%).
For all six narcotics, the 10(-4) M drug 
concentration resulted in depression of contractile function that was often 
associated with nonresponsiveness to electrical stimulation.
Pretreatment of 
muscles with naloxone (10(-4) M) did not prevent this reduction of contractile 
performance except at the highest concentration (10(-4) M) of meperidine.
Following removal of drug, contractile performance improved to varying degrees 
(recovery to 72-97% of control T), except in l-alpha-acetylmethadol-treated 
muscles, in which there was no recovery of T. Isoproterenol (0.8 X 10(-7) M) 
elicited a positive inotropic response whether administered in the presence of 
10(-4) M narcotic or following narcotic removal.
We conclude that narcotic 
analgesics in high concentrations exert a direct myocardial depressant effect 
which is not prevented by naloxone and therefore is not mediated by interaction 
with opiate receptors.
Rather, several effects, including myocardial depression, 
its reversibility by both drug removal and isoproterenol and decreased muscle 
excitability are consistent with the hypothesis that narcotic analgesics in high 
concentrations exert nonspecific, local anesthetic effect on the myocardium.
PMID: 6109016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Functional Uncoupling NMDAR NR2A Subunit from PSD-95 in the Prefrontal Cortex: Effects on Behavioral Dysfunction and Parvalbumin Loss after Early-Life Stress 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015 Nov;40(12):2666-75. doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.134. 
Epub 2015 May 8.

Functional Uncoupling NMDAR NR2A Subunit from PSD-95 in the Prefrontal Cortex: 
Effects on Behavioral Dysfunction and Parvalbumin Loss after Early-Life Stress.

Ganguly P(1)
 Holland FH(1), Brenhouse HC(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Northeastern University, Boston, MA, USA.
Erratum in
    Neuropsychopharmacology.
2016 Mar;41(4):1188. doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.334.
Exposure to early-life stress increases vulnerability to psychiatric disorders, 
including depression, schizophrenia, and anxiety.
Growing evidence implicates 
aberrant development of the prefrontal cortex (PFC) in the effects of early-life 
stress, which often emerge in adolescence or young adulthood.
Specifically, 
early-life stress in the form of maternal separation (MS) in rodents has been 
shown to decrease parvalbumin (PVB)-positive interneurons in the adolescent PFC; 
however, the mechanism underpinning behavioral dysfunction and PVB loss is not 
yet known.
We recently reported that MS causes overexpression of the NMDA 
subunit NR2A in the PFC of adolescent rats.
Elevated PFC NR2A is also found in 
developmental models of schizophrenia and is correlated with behavioral 
deficits, acting largely through its association with the postsynaptic protein 
PSD-95.
In addition, adolescent maturation of PVB-positive interneurons relies 
on NR2A-driven NMDA activity.
Therefore, it is possible that the NR2A/PSD-95 
signaling complex has a role in adolescent MS effects.
Here, we aimed to 
determine whether a discrete manipulation of PFC NR2A could prevent MS effects 
on PFC-controlled behaviors, including cognition, anxiety, and novelty-induced 
hyperlocomotion, as well as PVB loss in adolescence.
We intracranially infused 
the NR2A-specific blocking peptide TAT2A in order to uncouple NR2A from PSD-95 
in the early-adolescent PFC, without antagonizing the NMDA receptor.
We 
demonstrated that MS rats treated with TAT2A during early adolescence were 
protected from MS-induced PVB loss and exhibited less anxious behavior than 
those infused with control peptide.
These data implicate NR2A-related 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor development in adolescent behavioral and neural 
consequences of early-life stress.
DOI: 10.1038/npp.2015.134
PMCID: PMC4864660
PMID: 25953359 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Intracellular electrophysiological alterations in canine cardiac conducting tissue induced by aprindine and lignocaine 1. Cardiovasc Res. 1976 Mar;10(2):236-44. doi: 10.1093/cvr/10.2.236.

Intracellular electrophysiological alterations in canine cardiac conducting 
tissue induced by aprindine and lignocaine.

Steinberg MI
 Greenspan K.

The effects of aprindine and lignocaine (lidocaine USP) were compared on 
intracellularly recorded potentials from normal canine conducting tisues.
Only 
aprindine produced marked depression of the maximum rate of rise (Vmax) of 
action potentials elicited at normal cycle lengths (1000 ms).
Both compounds, 
however, produced enhanced depression of Vmax at short cycle lengths or at short 
S1-S2 coupling intervals at normal membrane resting potential.
Both lignocaine 
and aprindine shorten the action potential duration (APD) and effective 
refractory period (ERP) but increase the EPR/APD ratio.
These effects are easily 
reversible upon perfusion with drug-free solution only in the case of 
lignocaine.
DOI: 10.1093/cvr/10.2.236
PMID: 938991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Computational Model of Touch Sensory Cells (T Cells) of the Leech: Role of the Afterhyperpolarization (AHP) in Activity-Dependent Conduction Failure 1. J Comput Neurosci. 2005 Jan-Feb;18(1):5-24. doi: 10.1007/s10827-005-5477-3.

Computational model of touch sensory cells (T Cells) of the leech: role of the 
afterhyperpolarization (AHP) in activity-dependent conduction failure.

Cataldo E(1)
 Brunelli M, Byrne JH, Av-Ron E, Cai Y, Baxter DA.
Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Fisiologia and Biochimica, Università di Pisa, Via San Zeno, 
31, Pisa, 56100, Italy.
Bursts of spikes in T cells produce an AHP, which results from activation of a 
Na+/K+ pump and a Ca2+-dependent K+ current.
Activity-dependent increases in the 
AHP are believed to induce conduction block of spikes in several regions of the 
neuron, which in turn, may decrease presynaptic invasion of spikes and thereby 
decrease transmitter release.
To explore this possibility, we used the 
neurosimulator SNNAP to develop a multi-compartmental model of the T cell.
The 
model incorporated empirical data that describe the geometry of the cell and 
activity-dependent changes of the AHP.
Simulations indicated that at some 
branching points, activity-dependent increases of the AHP reduced the number of 
spikes transmitted from the minor receptive fields to the soma and beyond.
More 
importantly, simulations also suggest that the AHP could modulate, under some 
circumstances, transmission from the soma to the synaptic terminals, suggesting 
that the AHP can regulate spike conduction within the presynaptic arborizations 
of the cell and could in principle contribute to the synaptic depression that is 
correlated with increases in the AHP.
DOI: 10.1007/s10827-005-5477-3
PMID: 15789166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A new animal model of (chronic) depression induced by repeated and intermittent lipopolysaccharide administration for 4months 1. Brain Behav Immun. 2013 Jul;31:96-104. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.01.001. Epub
2013  Jan 9.

A new animal model of (chronic) depression induced by repeated and intermittent 
lipopolysaccharide administration for 4 months.

Kubera M(1)
 Curzytek K, Duda W, Leskiewicz M, Basta-Kaim A, Budziszewska B, 
Roman A, Zajicova A, Holan V, Szczesny E, Lason W, Maes M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Neuroendocrinology, Institute of Pharmacology, 
Polish Academy of Science, 31-343 Krakow, Poland.
kubera@if-pan.krakow.pl

Chronic activation of immune-inflammatory and oxidative and nitrosative stress 
(O&NS) pathways plays an important role in the pathophysiology of clinical 
depression.
Increased IgA responses directed against LPS of gram-negative 
bacteria, indicating increased bacterial translocation, may be one of the 
drivers underpinning these pathways.
There is a strong association between signs 
of bacterial translocation and chronicity of depression and O&NS, but not 
pro-inflammatory cytokines.
The aims of the present study were to: (1) develop a 
new neurobehavioral model of (chronic) depression (anhedonic behavior) that may 
reflect chronic LPS stimulation and is associated with increased oxidative 
stress, and (2) to delineate the effects of fluoxetine on this new depression 
model.
We established that in female mice repeated LPS injections once daily for 
5 days (from 750 μg/kg to a maximal dose 1250 μg/kg; increasing doses for the 
first three days which were then gradually decreased on day 4 and 5) at a 
one-month interval and this repeated for 4 consecutive months induced chronic 
anhedonia (estimated by the preference to drink a 1% sucrose) lasting for at 
least 7 weeks.
Chronic LPS administration significantly decreased thymus weight, 
proliferative activity of splenocytes, production of interferon (IFN)γ and 
interleukin-(IL)10, and increased superoxide and corticosterone production.
Treatment with fluoxetine for 3 weeks abolished the neurobehavioral effects of 
LPS.
The antidepressant effect of fluoxetine was accompanied by increased 
production of IL-10 and reduced superoxide and corticosterone production.
Our 
results suggest that repeated intermittent LPS injections to female mice may be 
a useful model of chronic depression and in particular for the depressogenic 
effects of long standing activation of the toll-like receptor IV complex.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2013.01.001
PMID: 23313516 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of 4
5-dichlor-1,3-benzendisulfonamide and of 4,5-dichlor-1,3-benzendisulfonylaniline on the morphogenesis of the otoliths in the chick embryo 1.
Experientia.
1969 Mar 15;25(3):292-3. doi: 10.1007/BF02034402.
The effect of 4,5-dichlor-1,3-benzendisulfonamide and of 
4,5-dichlor-1,3-benzendisulfonylaniline on the morphogenesis of the otoliths in 
the chick embryo.
Balsamo G, De Vincentiis M, Marmo F, Parisi G.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02034402
PMID: 5781545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Adrenergic mechanisms of the cystic plexus in the cat]. 1. Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova. 1984 Apr;70(4):464-7.

[Adrenergic mechanisms of the cystic plexus in the cat].

[Article in Russian]

Pushkarev IuP.

Hypogastric and pelvic nerves were stimulated in experiments carried out on 
isolated vesical plexuses of the cat as well as intra-or extracellular recording 
of the activity of vesical ganglion neurons was conducted. Characteristics of 
evoked responses
 ganglionic lability, rhythmic and posttetanic potentiation 
were studied.
Homosynaptic presynaptic origin of posttetanic potentiation was 
noted.
Suppression of ganglionic recording in stimulation of sympathetic fibres 
and in intraarterial injections of catecholamines is suggested to be connected 
with presynaptic adrenergic inhibition.
This suggestion was confirmed in 
experiments with administration of reserpine and phenoxybenzidine .
PMID: 6734841 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The compounding effects of high pollen limitation
 selfing rates and inbreeding depression leave a New Zealand tree with few viable offspring 1.
Ann Bot.
2015 Oct;116(5):833-43. doi: 10.1093/aob/mcv118.
Epub 2015 Jul 30.
The compounding effects of high pollen limitation, selfing rates and inbreeding 
depression leave a New Zealand tree with few viable offspring.
Van Etten ML(1), Tate JA(2), Anderson SH(3), Kelly D(4), Ladley JJ(4), Merrett 
MF(5), Peterson PG(6), Robertson AW(7).
Author information:
(1)Institute of Agriculture and Environment, Massey University, Private Bag 
11222, Palmerston North, New Zealand, mymegy@gmail.com.
(2)Institute of Fundamental Sciences, Massey University, Private Bag 11222, 
Palmerston North, New Zealand.
(3)School of Biological Sciences, University of Auckland, Private Bag 92019, 
Auckland, New Zealand.
(4)School of Biological Sciences, University of Canterbury, Private Bag 4800, 
Christchurch 8140, New Zealand.
(5)School of Science and Technology, Open Polytechnic of New Zealand, Private 
Bag 31914, Lower Hutt 5040, New Zealand and.
(6)Landcare Research, Massey University, Private Bag 11052, Palmerston North, 
New Zealand.
(7)Institute of Agriculture and Environment, Massey University, Private Bag 
11222, Palmerston North, New Zealand.
BACKGROUND AND AIMS: Interactions between species are especially sensitive to 
environmental changes.
The interaction between plants and pollinators is of 
particular interest given the potential current global decline in pollinators.
Reduced pollinator services can be compensated for in some plant species by 
self-pollination.
However, if inbreeding depression is high, selfed progeny 
could die prior to reaching adulthood, leading to cryptic recruitment failure.
METHODS: To examine this scenario, pollinator abundance, pollen limitation, 
selfing rates and inbreeding depression were examined in 12 populations of 
varying disturbance levels in Sophora microphylla (Fabaceae), an endemic New 
Zealand tree species.
KEY RESULTS: High pollen limitation was found in all populations (average of 
58 % reduction in seed production, nine populations), together with high selfing 
rates (61 % of offspring selfed, six populations) and high inbreeding depression 
(selfed offspring 86 % less fit, six populations).
Pollen limitation was 
associated with lower visitation rates by the two endemic bird pollinators.
CONCLUSIONS: The results suggest that for these populations, over half of the 
seeds produced are genetically doomed.
This reduction in the fitness of progeny 
due to reduced pollinator service is probably important to population dynamics 
of other New Zealand species.
More broadly, the results suggest that measures of 
seed production or seedling densities may be a gross overestimate of the 
effective offspring production.
This could lead to cryptic recruitment failure, 
i.e.
a decline in successful reproduction despite high progeny production.
Given 
the global extent of pollinator declines, cryptic recruitment failure may be 
widespread.
© The Author 2015.
Published by Oxford University Press on behalf of the Annals 
of Botany Company.
All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: 
journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/aob/mcv118
PMCID: PMC4590329
PMID: 26229065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Action of adenosine triphosphate on the depressed spontaneous electrical activity of the dog cerebral cortex 1. J Pharm Sci. 1969 Sep;58(9):1161-3. doi: 10.1002/jps.2600580934.

Action of adenosine triphosphate on the depressed spontaneous electrical 
activity of the dog cerebral cortex.

Benzi G
 Arrigoni E, Ferrara A, Mascherpa P.

DOI: 10.1002/jps.2600580934
PMID: 5346088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Herpesvirus Saimiri: In Vitro Sensitivity to Virus-Induced Interferon and to Polyriboinosinic Acid: Polyribocytidylic Acid 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1971 Apr;136(4):1163-7. doi:
10.3181/00379727-136-35451.

Herpesvirus saimiri: in vitro sensitivity to virus-induced interferon and to 
polyriboinosinic acid: polyribocytidylic acid.

Barahona HH
 Melendez LV.
DOI: 10.3181/00379727-136-35451
PMID: 4324740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Does Histamine Play a Role in the Secretogogic Effect of Avian Pancreatic "Gastrin"? 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1973 Dec;144(3):852-6. doi: 10.3181/00379727-144-37696.

Does histamine play a role in the secretogogic effect of avian pancreatic 
"gastrin"?

Turner SD
 Hazelwood RL.
DOI: 10.3181/00379727-144-37696
PMID: 4765963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
An influence of insulin on the effect of prostigmin in healthy mice and in mice with alloxan-induced diabetes mellitus. 1. Acta Physiol Pol. 1974 Sep-Oct;25(5):497-508.

An influence of insulin on the effect of prostigmin in healthy mice and in mice 
with alloxan-induced diabetes mellitus.

Moniuszko-Jakoniuk J.

PMID: 4428994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Zinc deficiency induces behavioral alterations in the tail suspension test in mice. Effect of antidepressants 1. Pharmacol Rep. 2012;64(2):249-55. doi: 10.1016/s1734-1140(12)70762-4.

Zinc deficiency induces behavioral alterations in the tail suspension test in 
mice. Effect of antidepressants.

Młyniec K(1)
 Nowak G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacobiology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Jagielonian University 
Medical College, Medyczna 9, PL 30-688 Kraków, Poland.
BACKGROUND: Recently, experimental zinc deficiency has been correlated with 
depression-like alterations in rodents.
METHODS: In the first part of present study, the time course of zinc deficient 
diet induced alterations in the tail suspension test (TST) in mice was 
investigated.
In the second part, the effect of imipramine and escitalopram in 
control and zinc-deprived for 3 weeks mice was examined in the TST.
RESULTS: A4- and 10-week administration of a Zn-deficient diet enhanced the 
immobility time in the TST (by 20% and 57%, respectively).
By contrast, a 2-week 
period of a zinc deficient diet effected the reduction (by 24%) of the 
immobility time.
Moreover, a 2- and 4-week (but not 10-week) of a Zn-deficient 
diet resulted in the reduction of the body weight (by 37% and 18%, 
respectively).
These results indicate the developing response to zinc deficiency 
induced by a zinc-deficient diet.
The antidepressant-like effect (reduction in 
the immobility time) of both drugs was significantly reduced in zinc-deprived 
mice, which suggests treatment-resistance induced by zinc deprivation.
CONCLUSION: Zinc deprivation induces "pro-depressive" behavior and alters 
antidepressant efficacy.
DOI: 10.1016/s1734-1140(12)70762-4
PMID: 22661173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Influence of synthetic polynucleotides and interferon on in vitro growth of cells derived from a mouse sarcoma. 1. Acta Pathol Microbiol Scand Suppl. 1974;Suppl 248:61-8.

Influence of synthetic polynucleotides and interferon on in vitro growth of 
cells derived from a mouse sarcoma.

Degré M
 Elgjo K.

PMID: 4217556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Comparative evaluation of the antiarrhythmic effect of derivatives of diphenylacetic acid and novocaine amide]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1971;34(2):168-70.

[Comparative evaluation of the antiarrhythmic effect of derivatives of 
diphenylacetic acid and novocaine amide].

[Article in Russian]

Serdiuk EN
 Koval'chuk LA.
PMID: 5563386 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Changes in the incorporation of labelled amino acids into proteins and homogenates of the brains of rats that have suffered acute hypoxia in the antenatal period]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1976 Sep;82(9):1061-4.

[Changes in the incorporation of labelled amino acids into proteins and 
homogenates of the brains of rats that have suffered acute hypoxia in the 
antenatal period].

[Article in Russian]

Maizelis MIa
 Zabludovskii AL.
The authors studied C14-leucine and S35-methionine incorporation into the brain 
tissue homogenates and protein from different parts of the brain of rats 
subjected to intrauterine hypoxia.
Depression of protein synthesis in certain 
brain structures, particularly in the hyppocampus was observed alongside with 
the stimulation of the amino acid incorporation into proteins of the other parts 
of the brain.
Changes of the amino acid penetration into tissue homogenates 
fialed to correlate with the rate of their incorporation into proteins in 
separate structures of the brain.
Experimental results pointed to disfunction in 
the protein metabolism intensity and in the blood-brain barrier system occurring 
during the late ontogenesis in rats surviving the intrauterine hypoxia.
PMID: 1033001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Orexin receptor antagonism prevents transcriptional and behavioral plasticity resulting from stimulant exposure 1. Neuropharmacology. 2010 Jan;58(1):185-94. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.07.008.  Epub 2009 Jul 14.

Orexin receptor antagonism prevents transcriptional and behavioral plasticity 
resulting from stimulant exposure.

Winrow CJ(1)
 Tanis KQ, Reiss DR, Rigby AM, Uslaner JM, Uebele VN, Doran SM, Fox 
SV, Garson SL, Gotter AL, Levine DM, Roecker AJ, Coleman PJ, Koblan KS, Renger 
JJ.
Author information:
(1)Depression and Circadian Disorders Department, Merck Research Laboratories, 
West Point, PA, USA.
Orexin is a key neurotransmitter of central arousal and reward circuits in the 
CNS.
Two receptors respond to orexin signaling, Orexin 1 Receptor (OX1R) and 
Orexin 2 Receptor (OX2R) with partially overlapping brain distributions.
Genetic 
and pharmacological studies suggest orexin receptor antagonists could provide 
therapeutic benefit for insomnia and other disorders in which sleep/wake cycles 
are disrupted.
Preclinical data has also emerged showing that the orexin system 
is involved in the behavioral and neurological effects of drugs of abuse 
(Aston-Jones et al., 2009; Harris et al., 2005).
Here we report sleep promoting 
effects of a recently described small molecule dual orexin receptor OX1R and 
OX2R antagonist.
This dual orexin receptor antagonist (DORA) also inhibits the 
ability of subchronic amphetamine to produce behavioral sensitization measured 
10 days following pre-treatment.
Transcriptional profiling of isolated reward 
and arousal circuits from brains of behaviorally sensitized animals showed that 
the DORA blocked the significant alteration of gene expression levels in 
response to amphetamine exposure, particularly those associated with synaptic 
plasticity in the VTA.
Further, DORA attenuates the ability of nicotine to 
induce reinstatement of extinguished responding for a reinforcer, demonstrating 
selectivity of the effect to reward pathways and not to food intake.
In summary, 
these data demonstrate efficacy of a dual orexin receptor antagonist for 
promotion of sleep and suggest that pharmacological inhibition of the orexin 
system may play a role in both prevention of drug-induced plasticity and 
drug-relapse.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2009.07.008
PMID: 19596018 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dibenamine blockade on gastric acid secretion in vitro and its protection by histamine antagonists 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1975 Feb;30(2):133-9. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(75)90091-6.

Dibenamine blockade on gastric acid secretion in vitro and its protection by 
histamine antagonists.

Watanabe K
 Goto Y.
Experiments to protect the histamine receptor against dibenamine blockade were 
carried out to elucidate the pharmacological characteristics of the H2-histamine 
receptor system for gastric acid secretion in isolated bullfrog gastric mucosa.
Dibenamine alone (5 times 10-minus 5 g/ml) irreversibly blocked both basal and 
histamine-stimulated acid secretion.
However, when the preparation was treated 
with dibenamine in combination with histamine (1 times 10-minus 5 g/ml) 
irreversibly blocked both basal and histamine-stimulated acid secretion.
However, when the preparation was treated with dibenamine in combination with 
histamine (1 times 10-minus 5 g/ml), the acid secretory response to histamine 
was restored after washing out dibenamine.
Burimamide, an H2-receptor 
antagonist, also protected the histamine sensitivity against dibenamine blockade 
in the concentration of 1 times 10-minus 4 g/ml.
Diphenhydramine and 
pyribenzamine were also protected with histamine receptor against dibenamine 
blockade.
The acid secretion induced by the action of histamine on the 
diphenhydramine-protected receptor was antagonized by diphenhydramine as well as 
burimamide.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(75)90091-6
PMID: 236188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adaptive changes in serotonin neurons of the raphe nuclei in 5‐HT<sub>4</sub> receptor knock‐out mouse <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Decreased serotonin (5‐HT) transmission is thought to underlie several mental diseases
 including depression and feeding disorders.
However, whether deficits in genes encoding G protein‐coupled receptors may down‐regulate the activity of 5‐HT neurons is unknown currently.
Based on recent evidence that stress‐induced anorexia may involve 5‐HT<jats:sub>4</jats:sub>receptors (5‐HT<jats:sub>4</jats:sub>R), we measured various aspects of 5‐HT function in 5‐HT<jats:sub>4</jats:sub>R knock‐out (KO) mice.
When compared to dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) 5‐HT neurons from wild‐type mice, those from 5‐HT<jats:sub>4</jats:sub>R KO mice exhibited reduced spontaneous electrical activity.
This reduced activity was associated with diminished tissue levels of 5‐HT and its main metabolite, 5‐hydroxyindole acetic acid (5‐HIAA).
Cumulative, systemic doses of the 5‐HT uptake blocker citalopram, that reduced 5‐HT cell firing by 30% in wild‐type animals, completely inhibited 5‐HT neuron firing in the KO mice.
This effect was reversed by administration of the 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub> receptor (5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>R) antagonist, WAY100635, in mice of both genotypes.
Other changes in DRN of the KO mice included increases in the levels of 5‐HT plasma membrane transporter sites and mRNA, as well as a decrease in the density of 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>R sites without any change in 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub> mRNA content.
With the exception of increased 5‐HT turnover index in the hypothalamus and nucleus accumbens and a decreased density of 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>R sites in the dorsal hippocampus (CA1) and septum, no major changes were detected in 5‐HT territories of projection, suggesting region‐specific adaptive changes.
The mechanisms whereby 5‐HT<jats:sub>4</jats:sub>R mediate a tonic positive influence on the firing activity of DRN 5‐HT neurons and 5‐HT content remain to be determined.</jats:p>
Repeated Cocaine Administration Impairs Group II Metabotropic Glutamate Receptor-Mediated Long-Term Depression in Rat Medial Prefrontal Cortex <jats:p>Drug-induced neuroadaptations within the medial prefrontal cortex (mPFC) are thought to underlie the development of cocaine sensitization. Here
 we report that repeated cocaine administration<jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>impaired the long-term depression (LTD) induced by bath application of group II metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) agonists DCG-IV [2<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>, 2′<jats:italic>R</jats:italic>, 3′<jats:italic>R</jats:italic>)-2-(2′, 3′-dicarboxycyclopropyl)glycine] or LY379268 [(1<jats:italic>R</jats:italic>,4<jats:italic>R</jats:italic>,5<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>,6<jats:italic>R</jats:italic>)-4-amino-2-oxabicyclo[3.1.0]hexane-4,6-dicarboxylic acid] at excitatory synapses onto layer V pyramidal neurons of rat mPFC.
In contrast, this impairment was not found in slices from rats treated with saline or a single dose of cocaine.
Such effect of cocaine was selectively prevented when cocaine was coadministered with the selective D<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>-like receptor antagonist SCH23390 [(<jats:italic>R</jats:italic>)-(+)-chloro-8-hydroxy-3-methyl-1-phenyl-2,3,4,5-tetrahydro-1<jats:italic>H</jats:italic>-3-benzazepine].
In slices from control rats, a brief application of either protein kinase C (PKC) activator phorbol-12,13-dibutyrute or adenosine A<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>receptor agonist 2-chloro-<jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sup>6</jats:sup>-(3-iodobenzyl)-adenosine-5-<jats:italic>N</jats:italic>-methyluronamide mimicked the effect of repeated cocaine treatment to impair the induction of LTD.
Bilateral intra-mPFC infusion of PKC inhibitor bisindolylmaleimide I or adenosine A<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>receptor antagonist MRS1220 (<jats:italic>N</jats:italic>-[9-chloro-2-(2-furanyl)[1,2,4]-triazolo[1,5-c]quinazolin-5-benzeneacetamide) before cocaine injection prevented cocaine-induced impairment of LTD induction.
Furthermore, endogenous adenosine tone is greater in slices from cocaine-treated rats than from the saline-treated controls.
When the metabolism of cAMP to adenosine was blocked, the extent of LTD in slices from saline and cocaine-treated rats was similar.
These results suggest that cocaine-induced impairment of group II mGluR-mediated LTD is caused, at least in part, by an increase in adenosine subsequent to the rise in cAMP after D<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>-like receptor activation, which leads to an adenosine A<jats:sub>3</jats:sub>receptor-mediated upregulation of PKC activity and thereby triggers an inhibition of group II metabotropic glutamate receptor function.</jats:p>
Ionic Distribution in Arterial Smooth Muscle and Persistent Vasodilation After Soft-Tissue Trauma 1. Eur Surg Res. 1974;6(6):321-9. doi: 10.1159/000127739.

Ionic distribution in arterial smooth muscle and persistent vasodilation after 
soft-tissue trauma.

Sandegård J
 Jonsson O, Zachrisson BE.
DOI: 10.1159/000127739
PMID: 4448207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression of glucose levels and partial restoration of pancreatic β-cell damage by melatonin in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats 1. Arch Toxicol. 2006 Jun;80(6):362-9. doi: 10.1007/s00204-005-0055-z. Epub 2005 
Dec 9.

Depression of glucose levels and partial restoration of pancreatic beta-cell 
damage by melatonin in streptozotocin-induced diabetic rats.

Kanter M(1)
 Uysal H, Karaca T, Sagmanligil HO.
Author information:
(1)Department of Histology-Embryology, Faculty of Medicine, Trakya University, 
Edirne, Turkey.
mkanter65@yahoo.com

Diabetes mellitus is a common but serious metabolic disorder associated with 
many functional and structural complications.
Glucose metabolism is disturbed 
due to an absolute or relative insulin deficiency.
The experiment was carried 
out to determine the effect of melatonin on blood glucose and insulin 
concentrations, and histopathology of pancreatic beta-cells in streptozotocin 
(STZ)-induced diabetic rats.
The rats were randomly allocated into one of the 
four experimental groups: group A (control), group B (diabetic untreated), group 
C (diabetic treated with melatonin for 6 weeks) and group D (diabetic treated 
with melatonin for 8 weeks); each group contained ten animals.
Diabetes was 
induced in B, C and D groups by a single intraperitoneal (i.p.)
injection of STZ 
(50 mg/kg, freshly dissolved in 5 mmol/l citrate buffer, pH 4.5).
The rats in 
melatonin-treated groups were subjected to the daily i.p injection of 10 mg 
kg(-1) of melatonin for 6 or 8 weeks starting the day after STZ injection.
Control and diabetic untreated rats were injected with the same volume of 
isotonic NaCl as the melatonin treated groups.
Almost all insulin-positive 
beta-cells were degranulated, degenerated or necrotic in the STZ-treated rats 
leading to decrease in insulin secretion and an increase in blood glucose 
concentration.
Melatonin treatment caused a sharp decrease in the elevated serum 
glucose, a slight increase in the lowered serum insulin concentrations and small 
partial regeneration/proliferation of beta-cells of islets.
It is concluded that 
the hypoglycemic action of melatonin could be partly due to small amelioration 
in the beta-cells of pancreatic islets causing a slight increase in insulin 
secretion, it is mostly due to the extrapancreatic actions of the melatonin.
DOI: 10.1007/s00204-005-0055-z
PMID: 16341692 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Concomitant Interferon Alpha Stimulation and TLR3 Activation Induces Neuronal Expression of Depression-Related Genes That Are Elevated in the Brain of Suicidal Persons 1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 31;8(12):e83149. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083149. 
eCollection 2013.

Concomitant interferon alpha stimulation and TLR3 activation induces neuronal 
expression of depression-related genes that are elevated in the brain of 
suicidal persons.

Hoyo-Becerra C(1)
 Huebener A(1), Trippler M(1), Lutterbeck M(1), Liu ZJ(2), 
Truebner K(3), Bajanowski T(3), Gerken G(1), Hermann DM(4), Schlaak JF(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital of Essen, 
Essen, Germany.
(2)Department of Anatomy, Tongji Medical College of Huazhong, University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan City, P.R.China.
(3)Institute for Forensic Medicine, University Hospital of Essen, Essen, 
Germany.
(4)Department of Neurology, University Hospital of Essen, Essen, Germany.
We have previously identified 15 genes that are associated with the development 
of severe depressive side effects during the standard therapy with interferon 
alpha and ribavirin in the peripheral blood of hepatitis C virus infected 
patients.
An enhanced expression of these genes was also found in the blood of 
psychiatric patients suffering severe depressive episode.
Herein, we demonstrate 
that the same depression-related interferon-inducible genes (DRIIs) are also 
upregulated in post-mortem brains of suicidal individuals.
Using cultured mouse 
hippocampal and prefrontal neurons we show that costimulation with murine IFN 
(mIFN) and the TLR3 agonist poly(I:C) promotes the expression of the described 
DRIIs, at the same time inducing pro-inflammatory cytokine expression through 
Stat1 and Stat3 activation, promoting neuronal apoptosis.
Consequently, the 
upregulation of selective DRIIs, production of inflammatory cytokines and 
inhibition of neuronal plasticity may be involved in the pathogenesis of 
IFN-associated depression.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0083149
PMCID: PMC3877033
PMID: 24391741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: JS is an academic editor of 
PLOS ONE.
This does not alter the authors' adherence to all the PLOS ONE 
policies on sharing data and materials.
Chronic psychosocial stress regulates the expression of both GR and MR mRNA in the hippocampal formation of tree shrews <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>A persistent hyperactivity of the hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal axis and thus elevated glucocorticoid levels are main neuroendocrine features of depressive symptomatology in humans. The broad range of effects that are set off by glucocorticoids is mediated by glucocorticoid receptors (GRs) and mineralocorticoid receptors (MRs)
 which themselves are subject to autoregulation.
In order to investigate the impact of long‐lasting psychological stress on corticosteroid receptor mRNA expression in the hippocampal formation, we employed the psychosocial stress paradigm in male tree shrews (<jats:italic>Tupaia belangeri</jats:italic>).
By in situ hybridization studies and semiquantitative evaluation of stress‐induced changes of GR and MR mRNA expression at the single‐cell level, brain tissue from subordinate animals which were exposed to 27 days (1 h/day) of social confrontation was compared to that of nonstressed animals.
Four weeks of stress exposure resulted in a downregulation of GR mRNA in the dentate gyrus and hippocampal subfields CA1 and CA3 of subordinate male tree shrews compared to controls.
The MR mRNA content in these subfields of the anterior hippocampus was also clearly reduced.
On the contrary, in a more posterior location on the longitudinal axis of the tree shrew hippocampus, the MR message was increased in subfields CA1 and CA3 and in the dentate gyrus.
These results suggest a relevance of the stress‐induced regulation of both corticosteroid receptor subtype mRNAs in a naturalistic challenging situation.
Moreover, the differential regulation of MR mRNA along the rostrocaudal axis of the hippocampus adds another feature to the heterogenous composition of this structure.
Hippocampus 2001;11:329–336.
© 2001 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
The role of 5-HT1A receptors in mediating acute negative effects of antidepressants: implications in pediatric depression <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Acute antidepressant exposure elevates the frequency of impulsive behavior and suicidal thoughts in children and adolescents with major depressive disorder (MDD). Long-term antidepressant treatment
 however, is beneficial for pediatric MDD, so it is necessary to explore novel treatments that prevent the potentially dangerous consequences of acute antidepressant initiation.
In the present study, a treatment strategy designed to reverse the acute negative behavioral effects of antidepressants was tested in rodents.
Co-administration of the 5-HT1A receptor (5-HT1AR) antagonist WAY-100635 reversed the negative effects of acute fluoxetine, a serotonin reuptake inhibitor, but not reboxetine, a norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor, supporting the involvement of 5-HT1AR in mediating the negative consequences of acute selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) treatment.
No 5-HT1AR antagonists are currently approved for use in pediatric populations, so alternative strategies should be explored.
One such strategy was suggested based on the hypothesis that the rate of 5-HT1AR activation and the subsequent inhibition of serotonergic neuron activity caused by acute SSRI administration is proportional to the loading rate of an antidepressant.
Existing pharmacological data were examined, and significant correlations were observed between the half-life of antidepressants and the rate of suicide-related events (SREs).
Specifically, antidepressants with longer half-lives have lower rates of SREs.
On the basis of these data, novel dosing strategies were developed for five antidepressants to mimic the pharmacological profile of the antidepressant with the longest half-life, fluoxetine.
These dosing strategies could be used to decrease the rate of SREs associated with acute antidepressant treatment in pediatric MDD until an improved pharmacological treatment is developed.</jats:p>
Induction of Xanthine Oxidase and Heme Oxygenase and Depression of Liver Drug Metabolism by Interferon: A Study with Different Recombinant Interferons 1. J Interferon Res. 1986 Jun;6(3):251-6. doi: 10.1089/jir.1986.6.251.

Induction of xanthine oxidase and heme oxygenase and depression of liver drug 
metabolism by interferon: a study with different recombinant interferons.

Ghezzi P
 Saccardo B, Bianchi M.

Induction of xanthine oxidase in mouse liver by interferon (IFN) was studied 
with three different recombinant human leukocyte IFN molecules: IFLrA, IFLrD and 
the hybrid IFLrA/D(Bgl II).
The ability of different IFN species to induce 
xanthine oxidase correlated with their ability to depress liver cytochrome 
P-450-dependent drug metabolism, supporting the hypothesis that reactive oxygen 
metabolites generated by xanthine oxidase might be responsible for this 
impairment of liver function by IFN.
The antioxidant N-acetylcysteine protected 
in vivo against the depression of liver drug metabolism by IFLrA/D.
IFLrA/D was 
also found to induce liver microsomal heme oxygenase, an effect that was 
probably secondary to the observed depression of cytochrome P-450.
DOI: 10.1089/jir.1986.6.251
PMID: 3018103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Response of post-ischemic myocardium to sympathetic stimulation: Relation to local norepinephrine release. 1. Jpn Circ J. 1993 Oct;57(10):969-78. doi: 10.1253/jcj.57.969.

Response of post-ischemic myocardium to sympathetic stimulation--relation to 
local norepinephrine release.

Komatsu E(1)
 Yamaguchi I, Fukuyama H, Takahashi K, Miyazawa K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Yamagata University School of Medicine, 
Japan.
Myocardial ischemia interrupts neurotransmission and causes the depression of 
norepinephrine release.
However, the effects of sympathetic nerve stimulation on 
neurotransmission and norepinephrine release in post-ischemic myocardium are not 
well defined.
We measured regional myocardial length and norepinephrine (NE) 
release during sympathetic nerve stimulation in anesthetized dogs.
Dogs were 
divided into 2 groups: Group 1 (n = 14); sympathetic nerve stimulation, Group 2 
(n = 9); pre-treatment with alpha-blockade yohimbine hydrochloride (0.2 mg/kg) 
followed by sympathetic nerve stimulation.
The left anterior descending artery 
was occluded for 15 min.
Sympathetic nerve stimulation was performed before 
coronary occlusion and after reperfusion.
In group 1, the decrease in systolic 
shortening in the ischemic region persisted for more than 60 min.
Although 
sympathetic nerve stimulation caused an increase in systolic shortening, it was 
lower than the pre-ischemic value.
NE release from the post-ischemic myocardium 
remained decreased for 60 min.
The decrease in the post-ischemic myocardial 
response to sympathetic nerve stimulation was associated with diminished NE 
release.
When the cardiac sympathetic nerve was denervated with an epicardial 
phenol application, NE release decreased even further.
In group 2, NE release 
did not decrease following reperfusion.
These results suggest that sympathetic 
nerve conduction is not completely impaired in post-ischemic myocardium and that 
pre-synaptic alpha -2 receptors might play an important role in diminished NE 
release.
DOI: 10.1253/jcj.57.969
PMID: 8230678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Potential hypolipidemic agents. XII. Synthesis and plasma lipid-lowering properties of some 3-pyridylmethyl ethers. 1. Acta Pharm Suec. 1975;12(5-6):445-54.

Potential hypolipidemic agents. XII. Synthesis and plasma lipid-lowering 
properties of some 3-pyridylmethyl ethers.

Bondesson G
 Hedbom C, Magnusson O, Stjernström NE.
PMID: 1217497 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Omeprazole-like compounds on histamine-stimulated acid and peptic secretions in conscious dog and cat. 1. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper. 1992 Jul;68(7):429-36.

Omeprazole-like compounds on histamine-stimulated acid and peptic secretions in 
conscious dog and cat.

Chiavarini M(1)
 Barocelli E, Ballabeni V, Razzetti R, Impicciatore M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology and Pharmacognosy, Faculty of Pharmacy, University 
of Parma.
A newly synthetized aniline derivative series has been tested on 
histamine-stimulated gastric acid secretion in conscious cats and dogs and 
compared to the proton pump inhibitors omeprazole and NC 1300.
The compounds 
markedly and long-lastingly inhibited acid output with a potency lower than 
omeprazole but very close to the reference compound NC 1300.
The results show 
that the introduction of a nitrogen atom, irrespective of the position in the 
benzimidazole ring does not seem to influence the gastric antisecretory 
activity.
PMID: 1482561 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Functional reactivation of the deafferented hippocampus by embryonic septal grafts as assessed by measurements of local glucose utilization 1. Exp Brain Res. 1985;58(3):570-9. doi: 10.1007/BF00235873.

Functional reactivation of the deafferented hippocampus by embryonic septal 
grafts as assessed by measurements of local glucose utilization.

Kelly PA
 Gage FH, Ingvar M, Lindvall O, Stenevi U, Björklund A.

Transection of the septo-hippocampal connections through fimbria-fornix damage 
in the rat results in profound hippocampal cholinergic deafferentation, and, 
when applied bilaterally, leads to severe and long-lasting impairments in 
learning and memory.
Previous studies have shown that intrahippocampal septal 
grafts can reestablish a new cholinergic in the initially denervated hippocampal 
formation and at least partly compensate for the lesion-induced learning 
impairments in fimbria-fornix lesioned rats.
The purpose of the present study 
was to determine the magnitude of lesion-induced alterations in cerebral 
function as reflected in local glucose use measured by (14C)-2-deoxyglucose 
(2-DG) autoradiography, and the degree to which this index of functional 
activity could be normalized following reinnervation from transplants of fetal 
cerebral tissue from the primordial septal region.
Six months after unilateral 
fimbria-fornix transection the rate of glucose utilization was reduced markedly 
throughout the ipsilateral hippocampus when compared to the intact contralateral 
side, while in the neocortex only the cingulate cortex showed long-lasting 
reductions in glucose use.
Rats that received a transplant of fetal 
septal-diagonal band tissue at the time of fimbria-fornix transection, and were 
sacrificed 6 months later, displayed significantly greater glucose utilization 
in the ipsilateral hippocampus and cingulate cortex than was measured in these 
areas in rats with lesion alone.
The recovery in glucose use was paralleled by a 
significant increase in acetylcholinesterase (AChE) staining in several areas of 
the ipsilateral hippocampal formation and cingulate cortex.
This index of 
graft-induced cholinergic reinnervation was, moreover, significantly correlated 
with the rate of glucose use.
Thus, in the fimbria-fornix transected animals the 
magnitude of glucose depression correlated with the extent of reduction in AChE 
staining, and in the grafted animals the degree of normalization of glucose use 
was correlated with the graft-induced increase in AChE-staining density.
These 
results thus indicate that the 2-DG autoradiographic technique can provide a 
unique opportunity to map both altered functional activity in localized areas of 
the brain following specific lesions and the extent to which transplant-derived 
reinnervation of the host may induce a return to normal functional levels in the 
target site.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00235873
PMID: 4007095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Nonadditive Genetic Effects and Inbreeding Depression for Somatic Cell Counts of Holstein Cattle 1. J Dairy Sci. 1995 May;78(5):1168-73. doi: 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(95)76734-0.

Nonadditive genetic effects and inbreeding depression for somatic cell counts of 
Holstein cattle.

Miglior F(1)
 Burnside EB, Dekkers JC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Animal and Poultry Science, University of Guelph, ON, Canada.
A total of 65,491 lactation means of log2-transformed SCC measures were analyzed 
from first lactation Holstein cows in Ontario.
Effects of inbreeding on SCC were 
estimated by a nonadditive sire and dam model that included additive, dominance, 
and additive by additive genetic effects and regression of lactation somatic 
cell score on inbreeding coefficients of the cows.
Variance components were 
estimated using the tildehat approximation to REML.
Solutions were by iteration 
on data.
Estimates of heritability for lactation somatic cell score in the 
narrow sense were .165 and in the broad sense were .203.
The additive by 
additive component (2.5% of the total phenotypic variance) was almost twice as 
large as the dominance component (1.3%).
The regression coefficient of lactation 
somatic cell score per 1% increase of inbreeding was .012.
The average increase 
of the population mean of lactation somatic cell score caused by a 10% increase 
of inbreeding coefficient was estimated to be 10.5% of the original phenotypic 
standard deviation of 1.153.
The inbreeding depression was thus relatively low, 
but, on average, inbred animals tended to have higher lactation somatic cell 
score.
This study provides preliminary evidence that inbreeding is related to 
disease prevalence in large purebred dairy populations.
DOI: 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(95)76734-0
PMID: 7622727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effects of surgical stimulus on the rat and the influence of analgesic treatment 1. Br Vet J. 1993 Nov-Dec;149(6):515-25. doi: 10.1016/S0007-1935(05)80036-3.

The effects of surgical stimulus on the rat and the influence of analgesic 
treatment.

Liles JH(1)
 Flecknell PA.
Author information:
(1)Comparative Biology Centre, Medical School, Newcastle upon Tyne, UK.
Comment in
    Br Vet J.
1993 Nov-Dec;149(6):505-6. doi: 10.1016/S0007-1935(05)80032-6.
The effects of three graded mid-line abdominal operations were investigated in 
rats.
All of the surgical procedures caused a significant reduction in food and 
water consumption, body weight and locomotor activity.
Animals which had the 
skin incision alone showed significantly less depression of food and water 
consumption and body weight than groups which underwent laparotomy.
The 
detrimental effects on water consumption and body weight could be significantly 
reduced by the administration of the opioid analgesic buprenorphine (TEMGESIC, 
Reckitt & Colman) (0.05 mg kg-1, s.c.).
The stepped response to graded surgery, 
and the reduction of the depressant effects of surgery on food and water 
consumption by buprenorphine, suggest that some of these changes may be related 
to the presence of pain after an operation.
DOI: 10.1016/S0007-1935(05)80036-3
PMID: 8111612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of opiate receptor drugs injected intracerebrally into the normovolemic and hypovolemic monkey 1. Peptides. 1985 Nov-Dec;6(6):1161-6. doi: 10.1016/0196-9781(85)90444-9.

Effects of opiate receptor drugs injected intracerebrally into the normovolemic 
and hypovolemic monkey.

Kregel KC
 Reynolds DG, Gurll NJ, Gisolfi CV.
Systemic injection of naloxone (NAL), an opioid-receptor antagonist, 
significantly elevates systolic blood pressure (SBP) in anesthetized hypovolemic 
monkeys, providing indirect evidence that endogenous opioids contribute to 
cardiovascular depression during shock.
The purpose of this study was to 
identify specific centrally located opioid receptor sites that participate in 
SBP regulation under normovolemic and hypovolemic conditions.
In 6 monkeys, 
bilateral guide cannulae were stereotaxically implanted above areas ranging from 
the diencephalon to the lower medulla.
Microinjections (1 microliter) of D- 
Ala2-Met-enkephalinamide (DAME) (3.4-27.2 nM) into normovolemic unanesthetized 
monkeys reduced SBP by 10-65 mm Hg in a dose-related fashion.
Subsequent 
injection of NAL (12.2 nM) attenuated this hypotensive response.
Heart rate fell 
20-40 bpm with DAME, but not in response to dose.
In the anesthetized animal 
rendered hypotensive (SBP = 45 mm Hg) by hemorrhage.
NAL injected into 
predetermined DAME-sensitive sites failed to increase SBP more than 5 mm Hg.
Even consecutive injections into multiple sites elevated SBP only 20 mm Hg.
We 
conclude that the centrally located opioid-sensitive sites tested exert only a 
mild influence in mediating hemorrhagic hypotension.
DOI: 10.1016/0196-9781(85)90444-9
PMID: 3010258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sex-specific antidepressant effects of dietary creatine with and without sub-acute fluoxetine in rats 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2012 Jun;101(4):588-601. doi: 
10.1016/j.pbb.2012.03.005. Epub 2012 Mar 10.

Sex-specific antidepressant effects of dietary creatine with and without 
sub-acute fluoxetine in rats.

Allen PJ(1)
 D'Anci KE, Kanarek RB, Renshaw PF.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Tufts University, Medford, MA 02155, USA.
The potential role of metabolic impairments in the pathophysiology of depression 
is motivating researchers to evaluate the treatment efficacy of creatine, a 
naturally occurring energetic and neuroprotective compound found in brain and 
muscle tissues.
Growing evidence is demonstrating the benefit of oral creatine 
supplements for reducing depressive symptoms in humans and animals.
A novel 
question is whether dietary creatine, when combined with antidepressant drug 
therapy, would be more effective than either compound alone.
To answer this 
question, four studies were conducted to investigate the behavioral effects of 
combined creatine and low-dose fluoxetine treatment using the forced swim test 
in male and female rats.
Sprague-Dawley rats were fed powdered rodent chow 
supplemented with 0%, 2% or 4% w/w creatine monohydrate for 5 weeks.
Rats were 
injected with fluoxetine (5.0 or 10.0 mg/kg) or saline according to a sub-acute 
dosing schedule.
Female rats maintained on a 4% creatine diet displayed 
antidepressant-like effects compared to non-supplemented females prior to 
fluoxetine treatment.
In contrast, creatine did not alter behavior reliably in 
males.
Following drug treatment and a second forced swim trial, the 
antidepressant-like profile of creatine remained significant only in females 
co-administered 5.0 mg/kg fluoxetine.
Moreover, in females only, supplementation 
with 4% creatine produced a more robust antidepressant-like behavioral profile 
compared to either dose of fluoxetine alone.
Estrous cycle data indicated that 
ovarian hormones influenced the antidepressant-like effects of creatine.
Addressing the issue of sex differences in response to treatment may affect our 
understanding of creatine, its relationship with depressive behavior, and may 
lead to sex-specific therapeutic strategies.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2012.03.005
PMCID: PMC4061609
PMID: 22429992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Postembryonic growth of the optic tectum in goldfish. II. Modulation of cell proliferation by retinal fiber input <jats:p>The proliferation of cells in the germinal zone of the optic tectum of adult goldfish was studied following unilateral optic nerve crush or removal of one eye. Dividing germinal cells were labeled with [3H]thymidine
 which was injected at various times (0 to 30 days) following surgery; fish were sacrificed after short (48 hr) survival times.
The numbers of labeled nuclei in the tectal germinal zones were compared on the two sides (intact and denervated).
We show that permanent removal of optic input (by enucleation) resulted in a sustained depression of [3H]thymidine incorporation in the tectal germinal zone on the denervated compared to the intact side.
Temporary denervation (by optic nerve crush) initially had a similar effect; however, upon reinnervation of the tectum by regenerating optic fibers, proliferation was enhanced on the experimental side compared to the intact side.
Because cells in the germinal zone are known to produce new tectal cells, neurons as well as glia, in the normal growing adult brain (Raymond, P. A. and S. S. Easter, Jr. (1983) J. Neurosci.
3: 1077–1091), some of the proliferating cells may have been generating neurons.
This inference is supported by the observation that in two fish whose right eye had been removed more than 2 years earlier, there were fewer neurons in the denervated tectum than in the intact tectum.
Thus, it is likely that the observed decrease in incorporation of [3H]thymidine by cells in the germinal zone of the denervated optic tectum resulted in a slower rate of addition of new tectal cells on the affected side.
We conclude that cytogenesis in the germinal zone of the growing optic tectum of adult goldfish is regulated by optic fiber input.
This mechanism may be important in matching the rates of growth of retina and tectum in the normal brain of the growing adult fish.</jats:p>
Presence of Adrenergic Receptors in Rat Endolymphatic Sac Epithelial Cells 1. J Membr Biol. 2013 Feb;246(2):109-14. doi: 10.1007/s00232-012-9508-5. Epub
2012  Nov 3.

Presence of adrenergic receptors in rat endolymphatic sac epithelial cells.

Matsubara A(1)
 Miyashita T, Inamoto R, Mori N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Otolaryngology, Faculty of Medicine, Kagawa University, 1750-1 
Ikenobe, Kita-gun, Miki-cho, Kagawa 761-0793, Japan.
aimatsu@med.kagawa-u.ac.jp

Intravenous application of catecholamines produces a depression in the 
endolymphatic sac direct current potential (ESP) and increases endolymphatic 
pressure via the β-adrenergic receptor (AR) in guinea pigs, suggesting that 
catecholamines play a role in the endolymphatic system.
However, the 
localization of ARs in the endolymphatic sac (ES) is still undetermined.
The 
presence of ARs in the rat ES was investigated by reverse 
transcriptase-polymerase chain reaction using laser capture microdissection 
(LCM) and immunohistochemical analysis.
Expression of α(1A)-, α(1B)-, α(2A)-, 
α(2B)-, β(1)-, β(2)- and β(3)-ARs was observed in LCM samples of ES epithelia.
Immunohistochemical analysis using specific antibodies showed immunofluorescence 
of β(2)- and β(3)-ARs in epithelial cells of the ES intermediate portion, and no 
specific staining results were obtained for α(1)-, α(2A)-, α(2B)- and β(1)-ARs.
The presence of β(2)-AR with no clear immunostaining of β(1)-AR in ES epithelial 
cells is in accordance with previous electrophysiological and pharmacological 
results, which suggests that β(2)-AR mediates the action of catecholamines on 
the ESP.
The presence of β(3)-AR in the ES epithelial cells and its absence in 
the stria vascularis implies that β(3)-AR plays a specific role in the ES.
DOI: 10.1007/s00232-012-9508-5
PMID: 23124944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Central depressive action of two N-aminomethyl derivatives of diethylpyridinedione. 1. Acta Physiol Pharmacol Bulg. 1983;9(1):35-43.

Central depressive action of two N-aminomethyl derivatives of 
diethylpyridinedione.

Beltcheva I
 Stoytchev T.

The central depressive action of 
N-aminomethylmorpholine-3,3-diethyl-2,4-pyridinedione (DKMM) and 
N-aminomethylpiperazine-3,3-diethyl-2,4-pyridinedione (DKMP), compounds having a 
marked anticonvulsive effect, has been studied applying a set of methods 
characterizing this action.
DKMM and DKMP are found to prolong hexobarbital, 
chlorhydrate and alcohol sleeping time.
Investigated by the modified jumping 
test, the two substances inhibit the central nervous system to the same degree.
They show at the same time properties of hypnosedatives and neuroleptics as 
well.
DKMM and DKMP manifest motor-incoordination activity in doses nearly 3.5 
times higher than the doses inhibiting corazol convulsions.
The compounds have a 
marked antiaggressive effect in the case of isolation syndrome, particularly 
pronounced for DKMP in a dose of 1/12 of LD50.
The results obtained show that 
DKMM and DKMP are central depressants with marked sedative-tranquillizing 
action.
PMID: 6684873 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of repeated adolescent stress and serotonin transporter gene partial knockout in mice on behaviors and brain structures relevant to major depression 1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2013 Dec 31;7:215. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00215. 
eCollection 2013.

Effects of repeated adolescent stress and serotonin transporter gene partial 
knockout in mice on behaviors and brain structures relevant to major depression.

Spinelli S(1)
 Müller T(2), Friedel M(3), Sigrist H(2), Lesch KP(4), Henkelman 
M(3), Rudin M(5), Seifritz E(6), Pryce CR(1).
Author information:
(1)Preclinical Laboratory for Translational Research into Affective Disorders, 
Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Psychiatric 
Hospital, University of Zurich Zurich, Switzerland ; Neuroscience Center, 
University and ETH Zurich Zurich, Switzerland ; Zurich Center for Integrative 
Human Physiology, University of Zurich Zurich, Switzerland.
(2)Preclinical Laboratory for Translational Research into Affective Disorders, 
Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, Psychiatric 
Hospital, University of Zurich Zurich, Switzerland.
(3)Mouse Imaging Centre, Hospital for Sick Children Toronto, Canada.
(4)Division of Molecular Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry, Psychosomatics 
and Psychotherapy, University of Würzburg Würzburg, Germany.
(5)Neuroscience Center, University and ETH Zurich Zurich, Switzerland ; 
Institute for Biomedical Engineering, University and ETH Zurich Zurich, 
Switzerland.
(6)Neuroscience Center, University and ETH Zurich Zurich, Switzerland ; Zurich 
Center for Integrative Human Physiology, University of Zurich Zurich, 
Switzerland ; Department of Psychiatry, Psychotherapy and Psychosomatics, 
Psychiatric Hospital, University of Zurich Zurich, Switzerland.
In humans, exposure to stress during development is associated with structural 
and functional alterations of the prefrontal cortex (PFC), amygdala (AMY), and 
hippocampus (HC) and their circuits of connectivity, and with an increased risk 
for developing major depressive disorder particularly in carriers of the short 
(s) variant of the serotonin transporter (5-HTT) gene-linked polymorphic region 
(5-HTTLPR).
Although changes in these regions are found in carriers of the s 
allele and/or in depressed patients, evidence for a specific genotype × 
developmental stress effect on brain structure and function is limited.
Here, we 
investigated the effect of repeated stress exposure during adolescence in mice 
with partial knockout of the 5-HTT gene (HET) vs. wildtype (WT) on 
early-adulthood behavioral measures and brain structure [using magnetic 
resonance imaging (MRI)] relevant to human major depression.
Behaviorally, 
adolescent stress (AS) increased anxiety and decreased activity and did so to a 
similar degree in HET and WT.
In a probabilistic reversal learning task, HET-AS 
mice achieved fewer reversals than did HET-No-AS mice.
5-HTT genotype and AS 
were without effect on corticosterone stress response.
In terms of structural 
brain differences, AS reduced the volume of two long-range white matter tracts, 
the optic tract (OT) and the cerebral peduncle (CP), in WT mice specifically.
In 
a region-of-interest analysis, AS was associated with increased HC volume and 
HET genotype with a decreased frontal lobe volume.
In conclusion, we found that 
5-HTT and AS genotype exerted long-term effects on behavior and development of 
brain regions relevant to human depression.
DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2013.00215
PMCID: PMC3876674
PMID: 24427124
Inhibitory effects of type A and type B monoamine oxidase inhibitors on synaptosomal accumulation of [3H]dopamine: a reflection of antidepressant potency 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1982 Jun 15;31(12):2195-7. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(82)90515-9.

Inhibitory effects of type A and type B monoamine oxidase inhibitors on 
synaptosomal accumulation of [3H]dopamine: a reflection of antidepressant 
potency.

Azzaro AJ
 Demarest KT.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(82)90515-9
PMID: 7115440 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differential Modulation of Nociceptive versus Non-Nociceptive Synapses by Endocannabinoids <jats:sec><jats:title>Background</jats:title><jats:p> Although a number of clinical and preclinical studies have demonstrated analgesic effects of cannabinoid treatments
 there are also instances when cannabinoids have had no effect or even exacerbated pain.
The observed pro-nociceptive effects appear to be due to cannabinoid-induced disinhibition of afferent synaptic input to nociceptive circuits.
To better understand how cannabinoid-mediated plasticity can have both pro- and anti-nociceptive effects, we examined the possibility that cannabinoids differentially modulate nociceptive vs. non-nociceptive synapses onto a shared postsynaptic target.
These experiments were carried out in the central nervous system (CNS) of the medicinal leech, in which it is possible to intracellularly record from presynaptic nociceptive (N-cell) or pressure-sensitive (P-cell) neurons and their shared postsynaptic targets.
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p> The endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoyl glycerol (2AG) elicited significant long-lasting depression in nociceptive (N-cell) synapses.
However, non-nociceptive (P-cell) synapses were potentiated following 2AG treatment.
2AG-induced potentiation of non-nociceptive synapses was blocked by the TRPV antagonist SB366791, suggesting involvement of the same TRPV-like receptor that has already been shown to mediate endocannabinoid-dependent depression in nociceptive inputs.
Treatment with the GABA receptor antagonist bicuculline also blocked 2AG-induced potentiation, consistent with the idea that increased synaptic signaling was the result of endocannabinoid-mediated disinhibition.
Interestingly, while bicuculline by itself increased non-nociceptive synaptic transmission, nociceptive synapses were depressed by this GABA receptor antagonist indicating that nociceptive synapses were actually excited by GABAergic input.
Consistent with these observations, GABA application depolarized the nociceptive afferent and hyperpolarized the non-nociceptive afferent.
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title><jats:p> These findings show that endocannabinoids can differentially modulate nociceptive vs. non-nociceptive synapses and that GABAergic regulation of these synapses plays an important role in determining whether endocannabinoids have a potentiating or depressing effect.
</jats:p></jats:sec>
Circumscribed lesion of the medial forebrain bundle area causes structural impairment of lymphoid organs and severe depression of immune function in rats 1. Mol Psychiatry. 1998 Sep;3(5):397-404. doi: 10.1038/sj.mp.4000426.

Circumscribed lesion of the medial forebrain bundle area causes structural 
impairment of lymphoid organs and severe depression of immune function in rats.

Pasternak KI(1)
 Timo-Iaria C, Rodrigues CJ, Maria DA, Duarte AJ, Paiva L, Pozzi 
DH, de Mendonça BB, Wong ML, Licinio J.
Author information:
(1)Clinical Neuroendocrinology Branch, National Institute of Mental Health, NIH, 
Bethesda, MD 20892-1284, USA.
Interactions between the immune system and the brain are a key element in the 
pathophysiology of diseases such as multiple sclerosis, neuroAIDS, and 
Alzheimer's, which affect large numbers of individuals and are associated with a 
high social cost.
However, the neuroanatomical basis of brain-immune 
interactions has not been elucidated.
We report that in Wistar rats of either 
sex bilateral electrolytic lesion of the medial forebrain bundle reduces body 
weight by 28% 7 days after lesioning, and causes widespread infections, aphagia, 
adypsia, structural damage to the lymphoid organs and heavy depression of T 
lymphocytes cytotoxicity.
The following alterations occur in the immune system 
after those lesions: the weight of the thymus, spleen and lymphonodes is reduced 
by 77.9%, 49.1% and 48.4%, respectively.
The thymus is atrophied and contains 
fewer lymphoid cells in the cortex than in the medulla.
In the spleen the white 
pulp is reduced and lymphoid cells from periarteriolar zones and at the chords 
are almost absent.
In lymph nodes cortical small lymphocytes are depleted and 
primary and secondary nodules and germinal centers all but disappear.
Cytotoxicity of lymphocytes is reduced by 86.2% in the thymus, 77.6% in the 
spleen and 70.2% in lymph nodes.
The critical area of lesion is at the 
medialmost portion of the medial forebrain bundle, at the preoptic area and 
rostral part of the anterior hypothalamus.
We suggest that this area contains 
neural circuits that are crucial for keeping the structure of lymphoid organs 
and the functional integrity of the immune system.
DOI: 10.1038/sj.mp.4000426
PMID: 9774772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Upake of plasma lipids by extrahepatic tissues of vitamin A fed rats. 1. Int J Vitam Nutr Res. 1975;45(2):107-12.

Upake of plasma lipids by extrahepatic tissues of vitamin A fed rats.

Setty OH
 Misra UK.
The uptake of newly synthesized plasma lipids from intraportally injected 
palmitate 1(-14)C by heart, kidney and adipose tissues of rats fed 33 mg retinol 
for 2 days have been studied.
The uptake of plasma lipids by adipose tissues and 
heart was decreased and that by kidney increased in rats fed retinol as compared 
to the controls.
PMID: 1165157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Abnormal patterns of maternal behavior in a genetic animal model of depression 1. Physiol Behav. 2005 Mar 31;84(4):607-15. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2005.02.006.

Abnormal patterns of maternal behavior in a genetic animal model of depression.

Lavi-Avnon Y(1)
 Yadid G, Overstreet DH, Weller A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and the Gonda (Goldschmied) Multidisciplinary Brain 
Research Center, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat-Gan, 52900, Israel.
The Flinders Sensitive Line (FSL) model is considered a genetic animal model of 
depression.
Among other characteristics, FSL rats express stress-induced 
anhedonia and an abnormal dopaminergic system.
Our hypothesis was that FSL rats 
would show abnormal maternal behaviors, especially reduced motivation to reach 
and care for pups and reduced licking and non-nutritive contact, based on their 
anhedonic characteristics.
Mother-infant interactions were assessed by time 
limited observations in FSL and Sprague-Dawley (SD) controls.
In study 1, 
differences were found in consummatory behaviors: FSL dams compared to SD dams 
showed less licking and significant decrease in non-nutritive contact from the 
first to the third postpartum weeks.
In addition, shorter duration of nursing 
postures was seen in FSL compared to SD dams in the first week postpartum, and 
this difference was significantly increased by the third week postpartum.
In 
study 2, after exposure to acute swim stress, differences emerged in appetitive 
behaviors: latencies to reach and care for pups were longer in FSL dams compared 
to controls, suggesting a stress-induced motivational deficit in FSL dams.
Possible explanations, especially regarding the FSL dams' reward system are 
discussed.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2005.02.006
PMID: 15811396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Functional Roles of Cardiac and Vascular ATP-Sensitive Potassium Channels Clarified by Kir6.2-Knockout Mice <jats:p>
            <jats:italic>Abstract</jats:italic>
            —ATP-sensitive potassium (K
            <jats:sub>ATP</jats:sub>
            ) channels were discovered in ventricular cells
 but their roles in the heart remain mysterious.
K
            <jats:sub>ATP</jats:sub>
            channels have also been found in numerous other tissues, including vascular smooth muscle.
Two pore-forming subunits, Kir6.1 and Kir6.2, contribute to the diversity of K
            <jats:sub>ATP</jats:sub>
            channels.
To determine which subunits are operative in the cardiovascular system and their functional roles, we characterized the effects of pharmacological K
            <jats:sup>+</jats:sup>
            channel openers (KCOs, ie, pinacidil, P-1075, and diazoxide) in Kir6.2-deficient mice.
Sarcolemmal K
            <jats:sub>ATP</jats:sub>
            channels could be recorded electrophysiologically in ventricular cells from Kir6.2
            <jats:sup>+/+</jats:sup>
            (wild-type [WT]) but not from Kir6.2
            <jats:sup>−/−</jats:sup>
            (knockout [KO]) mice.
In WT ventricular cells, pinacidil induced an outward current and action potential shortening, effects that were blocked by glibenclamide, a K
            <jats:sub>ATP</jats:sub>
            channel blocker.
KO ventricular cells exhibited no response to KCOs, but gene transfer of Kir6.2 into neonatal ventricular cells rescued the electrophysiological response to P-1075.
In terms of contractile function, pinacidil decreased force generation in WT but not KO hearts.
Pinacidil and diazoxide produced concentration-dependent relaxation in both WT and KO aortas precontracted with norepinephrine.
In addition, pinacidil induced a glibenclamide-sensitive current of similar magnitude in WT and KO aortic smooth muscle cells and comparable levels of hypotension in anesthetized WT and KO mice.
In both WT and KO aortas, only Kir6.1 mRNA was expressed.
These findings indicate that the Kir6.2 subunit mediates the depression of cardiac excitability and contractility induced by KCOs; in contrast, Kir6.2 plays no discernible role in the arterial tree.
</jats:p>
Involvement of Synaptic NR2B-Containing NMDA Receptors in Long-Term Depression Induction in the Young Rat Visual Cortex In Vitro 1. Chin J Physiol. 2011 Jun 30;54(3):190-5. doi: 10.4077/cjp.2011.amm020.

Involvement of synaptic NR2B-containing NMDA receptors in long-term depression 
induction in the young rat visual cortex in vitro.

Li YH(1)
 Wang J, Zhang G.

Author information:
(1)The Key Laboratory of Biomedical Information Engineering of Ministry of 
Education, and Research Center of Rehabilitation Science and Technology, School 
of Life Science and Technology, Xi'an Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710049, 
Shaanxi, People's Republic of China.
liyanhai@mail.xjtu.edu.cn

Activation of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs) has been implicated in 
various forms of synaptic plasticity depending on the receptor subtypes 
involved.
However, the contribution of NR2A and NR2B subunits in the induction 
of long-term depression (LTD) of excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) in 
layer II/III pyramidal neurons of the young rat visual cortex remains unclear.
The present study used whole-cell patch-clamp recordings in vitro to investigate 
the role of NR2A- and NR2B-containing NMDARs in the induction of LTD in visual 
cortical slices from 12- to 15-day old rats.
We found that LTD was readily 
induced in layer II/III pyramidal neurons of the rat visual cortex with 10-min 
1-Hz stimulation paired with postsynaptic depolarization.
D-APV, a selective 
NMDAR antagonist, blocked the induction of LTD.
Moreover, the selective 
NR2B-containing NMDAR antagonists (Ro 25-6981 and ifenprodil) also prevented the 
induction of LTD.
However, Zn2+, a voltage-independent NR2A-containing NMDAR 
antagonist, displayed no influence on the induction of LTD.
These results 
suggest that the induction of LTD in layer II/III pyramidal neurons of the young 
rat visual cortex is NMDAR-dependent and requires NR2B-containing NMDARs, not 
NR2A-containing NMDARs.
DOI: 10.4077/cjp.2011.amm020
PMID: 21789901 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
EFFECT OF BIRTH WEIGHT ON EFFICIENCY OF BEEF PRODUCTION* <jats:p><jats:bold>SUMMARY: </jats:bold> The large ‘lean beef’ breeds are vulnerable to calving difficulties and losses. Dystocia is related to high birth weight. Data recorded from evaluation experiments show that the birth weight of the ‘lean beef’<jats:italic>taurus</jats:italic> crossbreeds was high (39 ± 2.1 kg). <jats:italic>Indicus</jats:italic> beef genotypes were selected with the birth weight (29 ± 1.9 kg) significantly lower (P &lt; 0.01) without a depression in the final yield of beef.</jats:p><jats:p>To increase efficiency of beef production the lower birth weight factor needs be incorporated into genotypes for high viability and growth. Profitability depends on output per dam
 in relation to inputs, on a herd basis.
Hence, progress may depend on the application of such changes of genotype.</jats:p>
[Effects of hyperbaric oxygenation on oxidative phosphorylation in post-nephrotomy tissues sutured with different surgical threads (an experimental study)]. 1. Urol Nefrol (Mosk). 1998 Nov-Dec;(6):7-8.

[Effects of hyperbaric oxygenation on oxidative phosphorylation in 
post-nephrotomy tissues sutured with different surgical threads (an experimental 
study)].

[Article in Russian]

Kostenko VA.

The activity of mitochondrial respiration and oxidative phosphorylation (OP) was 
studied in white rats subjected to nephrotomy. The suture was made with 
absorbable surgical threads such as catgut plain
 biofil (from dura mater 
spinalis of the cattle), dexon II (polyglycolic acid).
The use of catgut plain 
inhibits biosynthetic processes 7 and 14 days after operation.
Hyperbaric 
oxygenation enhances oxidative phosphorylation in postoperative renal tissue 
sutured with different biological and synthetic absorbable surgical threads 
(catgut, biofil, dexon II) and prevents sharp depression of the above processes 
in the course of catgut biodegradation.
This fact is of great importance for 
reduction of normal functional and metabolic activity of the operated kidney.
PMID: 10051816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Separation induced changes in squirrel monkey hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal physiology resemble aspects of hypercortisolism in humans 1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1999 Feb;24(2):131-42. doi: 
10.1016/s0306-4530(98)00065-1.

Separation induced changes in squirrel monkey hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal 
physiology resemble aspects of hypercortisolism in humans.

Lyons DM(1)
 Wang OJ, Lindley SE, Levine S, Kalin NH, Schatzberg AF.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, Stanford University School 
of Medicine, CA 94305-5485, USA.
dmlyons@stanford.edu

When separated from groups, squirrel monkeys respond with significant increases 
in plasma cortisol and adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH).
While cortisol 
remains elevated above pre-separation levels, significant reductions occur in 
ACTH.
Monkeys that respond with greater increases in cortisol subsequently 
exhibit greater reductions in ACTH, which suggests that reductions in ACTH are 
mediated by corticosteroid feedback.
Monkeys that respond with greater increases 
in cortisol also tend to exhibit greater cerebrospinal fluid levels of the 
dopamine metabolite HVA, but not the norepinephrine metabolite MHPG, or 
corticotropin-releasing factor (CRF).
Attenuation of corticosteroid feedback 
with metyrapone results in significant increases in circulating ACTH, and in 
older monkeys increases plasma HVA.
Similar findings in humans have been 
reported in clinical studies of hypercortisolism and major depression.
DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4530(98)00065-1
PMID: 10101722 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Phosphoinositide deficiency due to inositol depletion is not a mechanism of lithium action in brain 1. Mol Genet Metab. 2004 May;82(1):87-92. doi: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.02.002.

Phosphoinositide deficiency due to inositol depletion is not a mechanism of 
lithium action in brain.

Berry GT(1)
 Buccafusca R, Greer JJ, Eccleston E.

Author information:
(1)Children's Research Institute, Children's National Medical Center, Department 
of Pediatrics, George Washington University School of Medicine and Health 
Sciences, Washington, DC, USA.
gerard.berry@jefferson.edu

Erratum in
    Mol Genet Metab.
2004 Dec;83(4):348.
The "inositol depletion hypothesis" has been widely held to be the explanation 
for both the effect of lithium on brain function, apropos of its use in mood 
disorders, and on the impairment of development and induction of embryonic 
malformations in diverse organisms.
The essence of the hypothesis is that a 
deficiency in cellular myo-inositol (Ins), secondary to lithium inhibition of 
inositol monophosphatase and/or multiple inositol polyphosphate phosphatase 
activities with trapping of Ins as inositol phosphates, leads to a depression of 
phosphatidylinositol (PtdIns) and a secondary impairment in inositide signaling.
However, the ability of relatively low micromolar levels of Ins to reduce 
mammalian PtdIns synthetase activity in vivo has never been adequately tested.
We have generated a lethal murine brain Ins deficiency model and measured PtdIns 
content using a novel MALDI-TOF MS method.
Our results show that in the most 
severe Ins deficiency ever recorded in a mammal, the brain PtdIns levels do not 
decrease.
We conclude that PtdIns deficiency due to "inositol depletion" is not 
a mechanism of lithium action in brain, and that Ins plays another unidentified 
role in the mammalian brain.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ymgme.2004.02.002
PMID: 15110328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Baroreceptor-Heart Rate Reflex in Acth Hypertension in Sheep 1. Clin Exp Hypertens A. 1983;5(1):21-9. doi: 10.3109/10641968309048807.

The baroreceptor-heart rate reflex in ACTH hypertension in sheep.

Stewart KW
 Coghlan JP, Denton DA, Mason RT, Scoggins BA, Whitworth JA.
ACTH administration in sheep produces an adrenally dependent rise in blood 
pressure.
Cardiac output and heart rate are usually increased.
The precise 
mechanisms involved in the genesis of the hypertension are unclear.
This study 
examines the sensitivity of the baroreflex heart rate response to phenylephrine 
hydrochloride and sodium nitroprusside before, during and after ACTH 
administration in sheep.
During ACTH administration there was a sustained rise 
in blood pressure within 24 hours, whereas heart rate rose gradually.
There was 
a sustained fall in baroreflex sensitivity to sodium nitroprusside within 24 
hours, whereas baroreflex sensitivity to phenylephrine fell gradually over the 
first three days.
The different time course of the change in sensitivity 
suggests that two different mechanisms are influenced by ACTH administration, 
for instance, changes in function in both cardiac vagal efferents and 
sympathetic pathways.
DOI: 10.3109/10641968309048807
PMID: 6299627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Preservation of diastolic function in monocrotaline-induced right ventricular hypertrophy in rats <jats:p>During ischemic heart diseases and when heart failure progresses depletion of myocardial energy stores occurs. d-Ribose (R) has been shown to improve cardiac function and energy status after ischemia. Folic acid (FA) is an essential cofactor in the formation of adenine nucleotides. Therefore
 we assessed whether chronic R-FA administration during the development of hypertrophy resulted in an improved cardiac function and energy status.
In Wistar rats ( n = 40) compensatory right ventricular (RV) hypertrophy was induced by monocrotaline (30 mg/kg; MCT), whereas saline served as control.
Both groups received a daily oral dose of either 150 mg·kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>·day<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>dextrose (placebo) or R-FA (150 and 40 mg·kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>·day<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>, respectively).
In Langendorff-perfused hearts, RV and left ventricular (LV) pressure development and collagen content as well as total RV adenine nucleotides (TAN), creatine content, and RV and LV collagen content were determined.
In the control group R-FA had no effect.
In the MCT-placebo group, TAN and creatine content were reduced, RV and LV diastolic pressure-volume relations were steeper, RV systolic pressures were elevated, RV and LV collagen content was increased, and RV-LV diastolic interaction was altered compared with controls.
In the MCT-R-FA group, TAN, RV and LV diastolic stiffness, RV and LV collagen content, and RV-LV diastolic interaction were normalized to the values in the control group while creatine content remained depressed and RV systolic function remained elevated.
In conclusion, the depression of energy status in compensated hypertrophic myocardium observed was partly prevented by chronic R-FA administration and accompanied by a preservation of diastolic function and collagen deposition.</jats:p>
Heterodimerization of Mineralocorticoid and Glucocorticoid Receptors at a Novel Negative Response Element of the 5-HT1A Receptor Gene 1. J Biol Chem. 2001 Apr 27;276(17):14299-307. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M005363200. Epub 
2001 Feb 2.

Heterodimerization of mineralocorticoid and glucocorticoid receptors at a novel 
negative response element of the 5-HT1A receptor gene.

Ou XM(1)
 Storring JM, Kushwaha N, Albert PR.
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research Institute, University of Ottawa, Ottawa, Ontario 
K1H-8M5, Canada.
Negative regulation of neuronal serotonin (5-HT1A) receptor levels by 
glucocorticoids in vivo may contribute to depression.
Both types I 
(mineralocorticoid) and II (glucocorticoid) receptors (MR and GR, respectively) 
participate in corticosteroid-induced transcriptional repression of the 5-HT1A 
gene; however, the precise mechanism is unclear.
A direct repeat 6-base pair 
glucocorticoid response element (GRE) half-site 5'-TGTCCT separated by 6 
nucleotides was conserved in human, mouse, and rat 5-HT1A receptor promoters.
In 
SN-48 neuronal cells that express MR, GR, and 5-HT1A receptors, deletion or 
inactivation of the nGRE (negative GRE) eliminated negative regulation of the 
rat 5-HT1A or heterologous promoters by corticosteroids, whereas its inclusion 
conferred corticosteroid-induced inhibition to a heterologous promoter.
Bacterially expressed recombinant MR and GR preferentially bound to the nGRE as 
a heterodimer, as identified in nuclear extracts of MR/GR-transfected COS-7 
cells, and with higher affinity than MR or GR homodimers.
In SN48 and COS-7 
cells, concentration-dependent coactivation of MR and GR was required for 
maximal inhibitory action by corticosteroids and was abrogated in the L501P-GR 
mutant lacking DNA binding activity.
Corticosteroid-mediated transcriptional 
inhibition was greater for MR/GR in combination than for MR or GR alone.
These 
data represent the first identification of an nMRE/GRE and indicate that 
heterodimerization of MR and GR mediates direct corticosteroid-induced 
transrepression of the 5-HT1A receptor promoter.
DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M005363200
PMID: 11278286 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Olfactory bulbectomy alters NMDA receptor levels in the rat prefrontal cortex 1. Synapse. 2000 Aug;37(2):159-62. doi: 
10.1002/1098-2396(200008)37:2<159::AID-SYN9>3.0.CO;2-N.

Olfactory bulbectomy alters NMDA receptor levels in the rat prefrontal cortex.

Webster HH(1)
 Flores G, Marcotte ER, Cecyre D, Quirion R, Srivastava LK.
Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche de l'Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, dépt.
de 
Psychiatre, Université de Montréal, Québec, Canada.
Olfactory bulbectomized (OBX) rats show a variety of behavioral and biochemical 
deficits that parallel human depression.
We investigated the expression of 
glutamate receptor subtypes in cortical and subcortical brain regions following 
bilateral olfactory bulbectomy in adult rats.
Quantitative receptor 
autoradiography using [(125)I]MK-801 (NMDA receptor), [(3)H]AMPA (AMPA 
receptor), and [(3)H]kainate (kainate receptor) was performed on brain sections 
at 1-5 weeks following olfactory bulbectomy.
Our results show an elevation of 
NMDA receptors in the medial prefrontal cortex within 1 week following 
bulbectomy, which persisted up to at least 5 weeks post-bulbectomy.
Neither 
kainate nor AMPA receptors were altered in any brain region examined.
The 
potential significance of these results is discussed in light of experimental 
findings supporting a role for NMDA receptors in the mechanism of action of 
antidepressant drugs and the pathophysiology of major depression.
Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1098-2396(200008)37:2<159::AID-SYN9>3.0.CO;2-N
PMID: 10881036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Time-dependent hypoxic ventilatory responses in rats: effects of ketanserin and 5-carboxamidotryptamine <jats:p>We hypothesized that the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) active drugs ketanserin and 5-carboxamidotryptamine (5-CT) would modulate time-dependent hypoxic phrenic and hypoglossal responses
 including 1) short-term hypoxic response, 2) posthypoxia frequency decline (PHFD), and 3) long-term facilitation (LTF) of respiratory motor output.
Phrenic and hypoglossal nerve activities were recorded in urethan-anesthetized, paralyzed, vagotomized, and artificially ventilated rats pretreated either with ketanserin (5-HT<jats:sub>2A/C</jats:sub>antagonist; 2 mg/kg iv), 5-CT (5-HT<jats:sub>1A/B</jats:sub>agonist; 10 μg/kg iv), or saline (sham).
Rats were exposed to three 5-min episodes of hypoxia [fractional inspired O<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>([Formula: see text]) = 0.11], separated by 5 min of hyperoxia ([Formula: see text] = 0.5).
During hypoxia, ketanserin augmented phrenic but not hypoglossal burst amplitude; 5-CT had no effect.
Both drugs accentuated PHFD.
Ketanserin blocked phrenic LTF; hypoglossal LTF was not apparent, even in sham-treated rats.
5-CT reversed LTF, resulting in a long-lasting depression of phrenic burst frequency and amplitude without effect on hypoglossal burst amplitude.
The data suggest that 1) 5-HT<jats:sub>2A/C</jats:sub>receptor activation modulates the short-term hypoxic phrenic response and PHFD and is necessary for LTF; and 2) 5-CT may affect time-dependent hypoxic ventilatory responses by reducing serotonin release via 5-HT<jats:sub>1A/B</jats:sub>autoreceptor activation.</jats:p>
Role of RNA Synthesis in the Estrogen Induction of a Specific Uterine Protein <jats:p>The rate of amino acid incorporation into a specific uterine protein (induced protein band) isolated by gel electrophoresis has been shown to be markedly stimulated within an hour after estrogen administration. Injection of actinomycin D (8 mg/kg) prior to estrogen blocks the synthesis of induced protein. The accumulation of the product of the actinomycin D-sensitive step (induced protein band RNA) is significant 15 minutes after estrogen
 and its synthesis would appear to be initiated as soon as the estrogen-receptor complex reaches the nucleus.
Blocking protein synthesis with puromycin or cycloheximide did not affect the accumulation of induced protein band RNA, indicating that this is one of the earliest macromolecular synthetic events to occur after estrogen administration.</jats:p>
Impact of Persistent Cortical Activity (Up States) on Intracortical and Thalamocortical Synaptic Inputs <jats:p> The neocortex generates short epochs of persistent activity called up states
 which are associated with changes in cellular and network excitability.
Using somatosensory thalamocortical slices, we studied the impact of persistent cortical activity during spontaneous up states on intrinsic cellular excitability (input resistance) and on excitatory synaptic inputs of cortical cells.
At the intrinsic excitability level, we found that the expected decrease in input resistance (high conductance) resulting from synaptic barrages during up states is counteracted by an increase in input resistance due to depolarization per se.
The result is a variable but on average relatively small reduction in input resistance during up states.
At the synaptic level, up states enhanced a late synaptic component of short-latency thalamocortical field potential responses but suppressed intracortical field potential responses.
The thalamocortical enhancement did not reflect an increase in synaptic strength, as determined by measuring the evoked postsynaptic current, but instead an increase in evoked action potential (spike) probability due to depolarization during up states.
In contrast, the intracortical suppression was associated with a reduction in synaptic strength, apparently driven by increased presynaptic intracortical activity during up states.
In addition, intracortical suppression also reflected a reduction in evoked spike latency caused by depolarization and the abolishment of longer-latency spikes caused by stronger inhibitory drive during up states.
In conclusion, depolarization during up states increases the success of excitatory synaptic inputs to reach firing.
However, activity-dependent synaptic depression caused by increased presynaptic firing during up states and the enhancement of evoked inhibitory drive caused by depolarization suppress excitatory intracortical synaptic inputs.
</jats:p>
Synthesis and Biological Activity of Quinolyl Acetic Acid Derivatives 1. J Pharm Sci. 1973 Dec;62(12):2028-30. doi: 10.1002/jps.2600621229.

Synthesis and biological activity of quinolyl acetic acid derivatives.

Kohl H
 de Souza NJ, Desai PD.
DOI: 10.1002/jps.2600621229
PMID: 4202681 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Increased stress reactivity is associated with cognitive deficits and decreased hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor in a mouse model of affective disorders 1. J Psychiatr Res. 2010 Jul;44(9):566-75. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.11.014.
 Epub 2009 Dec 24.

Increased stress reactivity is associated with cognitive deficits and decreased 
hippocampal brain-derived neurotrophic factor in a mouse model of affective 
disorders.

Knapman A(1)
 Heinzmann JM, Hellweg R, Holsboer F, Landgraf R, Touma C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Neuroendocrinology, Max Planck Institute of 
Psychiatry, Kraepelinstrasse 2-10, 80804 Munich, Germany.
alanaknapman@hotmail.com

Cognitive deficits are a common feature of major depression (MD), with largely 
unknown biological underpinnings.
In addition to the affective and cognitive 
symptoms of MD, a dysregulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis 
is commonly observed in these patients.
Increased plasma glucocorticoid levels 
are known to render the hippocampus susceptible to neuronal damage.
This 
structure is important for learning and memory, creating a potential link 
between HPA axis dysregulation and cognitive deficits in depression.
In order to 
further elucidate how altered stress responsiveness may contribute to the 
etiology of MD, three mouse lines with high (HR), intermediate (IR), or low (LR) 
stress reactivity were generated by selective breeding.
The aim of the present 
study was to investigate whether increased stress reactivity is associated with 
deficits in hippocampus-dependent memory tests.
To this end, we subjected mice 
from the HR, IR, and LR breeding lines to tests of recognition memory, spatial 
memory, and depression-like behavior.
In addition, measurements of brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) in the hippocampus and plasma of these animals were 
conducted.
Our results demonstrate that HR mice exhibit hippocampus-dependent 
memory deficits along with decreased hippocampal, but not plasma, BDNF levels.
Thus, the stress reactivity mouse lines are a promising animal model of the 
cognitive deficits in MD with the unique feature of a genetic predisposition for 
an altered HPA axis reactivity, which provides the opportunity to explore the 
progression of the symptoms of MD, predisposing genetic factors as well as new 
treatment strategies.
Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2009.11.014
PMID: 20035953 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
tert-Butoxycarbonyl as a Convenient Protecting Group in Synthesis of Potential Centrally Active Dopamine Derivatives 1. J Pharm Sci. 1978 Apr;67(4):558-9. doi: 10.1002/jps.2600670433.

tert-Butoxycarbanyl as a convenient protecting group in synthesis of potential 
centrally active dopamine derivatives.

Walker RB
 Ayres JW, Block JH, Lock A.
Several pivaloyl and pivaloyloxy esters and amides of dopamine were synthesized 
for possible antiparkinson activity.
The compounds were synthesized by select O- 
and N-acylation and N-methylation procedures.
The tert-butoxycarbonyl function 
is an effective and easily removed nitrogen-protecting group for dopamine.
Preliminary biological testing results showed that all compounds tested elicited 
a hypothermic response in mice, while only O,O-dipivaloyl-N,N-dimethyldopamine 
reversed reserpine-induced motor depression in mice.
However, it is difficult to 
conclude from the preliminary data that the observed biological effects were due 
to central dopaminergic receptor stimulation.
DOI: 10.1002/jps.2600670433
PMID: 641771 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Immunosuppression in Dogs Naturally Infected with Babesia gibsoni. 1. J Vet Med Sci. 1993 Jun;55(3):503-5. doi: 10.1292/jvms.55.503.

Immunosuppression in dogs naturally infected with Babesia gibsoni.

Adachi K(1)
 Ueno C, Makimura S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Internal Medicine, Faculty of Agriculture, Miyazaki 
University, Japan.
We examined lymphoproliferative response to phytohemagglutinin and anti-parasite 
antibody level in dogs naturally infected with Babesia gibsoni.
The dogs with 
subclinical B. gibsoni infection exhibited suppressed lymphocyte blastogenesis.
Prominent depression of lymphocyte blastogenesis and anti-parasite antibody 
production was observed in dogs suffering from relapses of clinical B. gibsoni 
infection.
DOI: 10.1292/jvms.55.503
PMID: 8357932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enhanced cardioplegic protection by a fluorocarbon-oxygenated reperfusate: A phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonance study 1. J Surg Res. 1985 Sep;39(3):216-23. doi: 10.1016/0022-4804(85)90145-3.

Enhanced cardioplegic protection by a fluorocarbon-oxygenated reperfusate: a 
phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonance study.

Bernard M
 Menasche P, Canioni P, Grousset C, Fontanarava E, Geyer RP, Piwnica 
A, Cozzone PJ.
Prolonged global ischemia results in a defect in oxygen extraction during early 
reperfusion.
This study was thus undertaken to assess the effects of maintaining 
cardioplegia at the onset of reoxygenation in view of channeling available 
energy toward reparative cell processes rather than mechanical activity.
Twenty-four isolated perfused rat hearts were subjected to 120 min of 15 degrees 
C ischemia.
Group I (control) was reperfused with the standard Krebs perfusion 
medium whereas in groups II and III the initial reperfusate consisted of an 
oxygenated alkaline cardioplegic solution prior to the resumption of Krebs 
perfusion.
Oxygenation of the cardioplegic reperfusate was ensured by 
fluorocarbons at a concentration of 10% (O2 content: 5.5 vol %; group II) or 20% 
(O2 content: 9 vol %; group III).
In addition to hemodynamical determinations, 
high-energy phosphates and intracellular pH were monitored serially by 
phosphorus-31 nuclear magnetic resonance spectroscopy.
After 30 min of 
reperfusion postischemic recovery of aortic flow was better in group II (74.0 
+/- 5.9% of control) than in group I (59.1 +/- 5.4% of control, P less than 
0.05).
This functional improvement correlated with a higher postischemic 
increase in phosphocreatine levels (103.21 +/- 11.21% vs 74.12 +/- 3.59%, at 3 
min of reperfusion, P less than 0.05) without significant differences in total 
ATP content.
Group III hearts exhibited a slow recovery as evidenced by a severe 
depression in aortic flow, coronary arteriovenous difference, and total 
phosphate content during the 15 initial minutes of reperfusion.
These results 
show that the protection provided by cardioplegia can be improved by a 
fluorocarbon-oxygenated cardioplegic reperfusate.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0022-4804(85)90145-3
PMID: 4033105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cardiovascular Studies during Controlled Baroreflex Activation in the Dog: I. Effects of Enflurane <jats:p>In chloralose‐anaesthetized dogs the carotid sinuses were bilaterally perfused with blood from a femoral artery
 either at systemic arterial pressure through a direct by‐pass or with a pump in order to control the sinus pressure.
Influences from cardiac receptors and aortic baroreceptors were eliminated by denervation.
Administration of enflurane (1.6% end‐tidal concentration) with the presence of barostatic modulation, i. e. the carotid sinuses were perfused at prevailing systemic arterial pressure, reduced cardiac performance (cardiac output, cardiac contractility, heart rate and left ventricular stroke work) and mean arterial pressure.
When barostatic compensation of enflurane‐induced circulatory changes was prevented by maintaining sinus perfusion pressure constant at the pre‐enflurane level, these haemodynamic alterations, with the exception of cardiac output, were significantly more pronounced.
Furthermore, systemic vascular resistance decreased.
We conclude that barostatic reflexes significantly modify cardiovascular depressive effects of enflurane.</jats:p>
Behaviorally augmented versus other components in organophosphate tolerance: The role of reinforcement and response factors*1 1. Fundam Appl Toxicol. 1985 Dec;5(6 Pt 2):S213-24. doi: 
10.1016/0272-0590(85)90131-9.

Behaviorally augmented versus other components in organophosphate tolerance: the 
role of reinforcement and response factors.

Bignami G
 Giardini V, Scorrano M.

Male Wistar-derived rats were used to assess the behaviorally augmented 
component of tolerance to paraoxon depression of a feeding response.
Separate 
groups of animals were treated daily by 0.125 mg/kg of the compound given sc 
either 1 hr before the start or 45 min after the end of a 90-min feeding 
session.
However, the dose was reduced to 0.0625 mg/kg from Day 9 to Day 12 of 
the treatment series if animals showed too severe a reduction in food 
consumption.
After development of tolerance by the presession treatment group, 
the animals treated after feeding were shifted to treatment before feeding.
This 
shift produced a marked depression in food consumption.
This confirms similar 
data previously obtained by a different test (two-way avoidance), and indicates 
that behaviorally augmented tolerance to paraoxon related to practice factors 
may be a fairly general phenomenon.
Other experiments were to assess the effects 
of paraoxon in the conditioned taste aversion (CTA) paradigm.
These showed the 
development of an aversion only at high dosage levels (two pairings between the 
flavor cue and 0.25 mg/kg sc, or four pairings with a 0.17-mg/kg dose).
However, 
the failure of lower doses to produce CTA may have depended on the relatively 
slow onset of the intoxication, producing an extended interval between the end 
of cue exposure and the development of malaise or illness.
Two pretreatments 
given 6 and 3 days before the first conditioning session in an experiment using 
the 2 X 0.25-mg/kg schedule did not affect the development of CTA as measured by 
a conventional double-bottle test.
However, a typical interference effect 
produced by prior exposure was shown by a substantial acceleration of subsequent 
CTA extinction in pretreated animals.
DOI: 10.1016/0272-0590(85)90131-9
PMID: 4092889 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Early hypoxic contracture of the myocardium in adult and newborn rats]. 1. Fiziol Zh (1978). 1992 Nov-Dec;38(6):36-41.

[Early hypoxic contracture of the myocardium in adult and newborn rats].

[Article in Russian]

Mashanov GI
 Tsyvían PB, Arteméva OG.
The effect of 30 min substrate free hypoxia (H) on isometric tension was studied 
in isolated myocardium (M) of adult (A) and newborn (N) rats.
The perfusion with 
50% Na+ H solution caused in AM the development of H contracture which was more 
than 50% higher than control contracture.
H perfusion with 0.1 mM Ca2+, 1.0 mM 
La3+, and 10.0 mM of caffeine provides the discrimination of control and hypoNa+ 
contractures.
It is assumed that early H contracture in AM is a result of 
inability of Ca-sequestering system to accumulate intracellular Ca2+ and Ca2+ 
influxing through the sarcolemma.
In myocardium of N rats Na-Ca exchange is 
proposed as a main source of Ca2+ for H contracture development.
PMID: 1340450 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Impact of aflatoxin B1 on hypothalamic neuropeptides regulating feeding behavior 1. Neurotoxicology. 2015 Jul;49:165-73. doi: 10.1016/j.neuro.2015.06.008. Epub
2015  Jun 30.

Impact of aflatoxin B1 on hypothalamic neuropeptides regulating feeding 
behavior.

Trebak F(1)
 Alaoui A(2), Alexandre D(3), El Ouezzani S(2), Anouar Y(4), 
Chartrel N(3), Magoul R(2).
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology & Nutritional and climatic Environment, 
University Sidi Mohamed Ben Abdellah, Faculty of Sciences DM, Fez, Morocco; 
INSERM U982, Laboratory of Neuronal and Neuroendocrine Differentiation and 
Communication, Rouen University, Institute for Research and Innovation in 
Biomedicine (IRIB), 76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France; Normandy University, Caen, 
France.
(2)Laboratory of Neuroendocrinology & Nutritional and climatic Environment, 
University Sidi Mohamed Ben Abdellah, Faculty of Sciences DM, Fez, Morocco.
(3)INSERM U982, Laboratory of Neuronal and Neuroendocrine Differentiation and 
Communication, Rouen University, Institute for Research and Innovation in 
Biomedicine (IRIB), 76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France; Normandy University, Caen, 
France.
(4)INSERM U982, Laboratory of Neuronal and Neuroendocrine Differentiation and 
Communication, Rouen University, Institute for Research and Innovation in 
Biomedicine (IRIB), 76821 Mont-Saint-Aignan, France; Normandy University, Caen, 
France.
Electronic address: youssef.anouar@univ-rouen.fr.
The presence of mycotoxins in food is a major problem of public health as they 
produce immunosuppressive, hepatotoxic and neurotoxic effects.
Mycotoxins also 
induce mutagenic and carcinogenic effects after long exposure.
Among mycotoxins 
that contaminate food are aflatoxins (AF) such as AFB1, which is the most 
powerful natural carcinogen.
The AF poisoning results in symptoms of depression, 
anorexia, diarrhea, jaundice or anemia that can lead to death, but very few 
studies have explored the impact of AF on neuroendocrine regulations.
To better 
understand the neurotoxic effects of AF related to anorexia, we explored in rat 
the impact of AFB1 on the major hypothalamic neuropeptides regulating feeding 
behavior, either orexigenic (NPY, Orexin, AgRP, MCH) or anorexigenic (α-MSH, 
CART, TRH).
We also studied the effect of AFB1 on a novel neuropeptide, the 
secretogranin II (SgII)-derived peptide EM66, which has recently been linked to 
the control of food intake.
For this, adult male rats were orally treated twice 
a week for 5 weeks with a low dose (150 μg/kg) or a high dose (300 μg/kg) of 
AFB1 dissolved in corn oil.
Repeated exposure to AFB1 resulted in reduced body 
weight gain, which was highly significant for the high dose of AF.
Immunocytochemical and quantitative PCR experiments revealed a dose-related 
decrease in the expression of all the hypothalamic neuropeptides studied in 
response to AFB1.
Such orexigenic and anorexigenic alterations may underlie 
appetite disorders as they are correlated to a dose-dependent decrease in body 
weight gain of treated rats as compared to controls.
We also found a decrease in 
the number of EM66-containing neurons in the arcuate nucleus of AFB1-treated 
animals, which was associated with a lower expression of its precursor SgII.
These findings show for the first time that repeated consumption of AFB1 
disrupts the hypothalamic regulation of neuropeptides involved in feeding 
behavior, which may contribute to the lower body weight gain associated to AF 
exposure.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuro.2015.06.008
PMID: 26141519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of inflammatory cytokines and chemoattractants in the rat model of streptozotocin-induced diabetic heart failure. 1. Endocr Regul. 2008 Sep;42(4):129-35.

Role of inflammatory cytokines and chemoattractants in the rat model of 
streptozotocin-induced diabetic heart failure.

Drimal J(1)
 Knezl V, Navarova J, Nedelcevova J, Paulovicova E, Sotnikova R, 
Snirc V, Drimal D.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Experimental Pharmacology, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 
Bratislava, Slovak Republic.
jan.drimal@savba.sk

OBJECTIVE: It is not yet clear how oxidative stress, free radicals, inflammatory 
cytokines and chemoattractants produced in the heart induce chronic heart 
failure.
The myocardial damage caused by chronic diabetes results either from 
the persistence of inflammatory signaling directly in the heart or from the 
dysregulation of anti-inflammatory signaling systems.
In the rat model of 
streptozotocin-induced diabetes (STZD) we investigated 1/ the concentration of 
free radicals (FR), 2/ reduced glutathione (GSH), 3/ lysozomal enzymes, 4/ 
inflammatory cytokines (tumor necrosis factor-?
(TNF-?)
and interleukin-6 
(IL-6)), and monocyte chemoattractant protein-1 (mcp-1) in the myocardium.
METHODS: Diabetes was induced in 12 male Wistar rats by injection of 
streptozotocin (STZ).
The free radical scavenger and cardiac protectant SMe1EC2 
(10 mg/kg/d.)
was given orally for 5 days and 5 weeks and these animals were 
compared with the diabetic and non-diabetic controls.
RESULTS: We found reduced heart rate and rate dependent functions of the rat 
heart, early release of free radicals triggering the release of cytotoxic 
inflammatory cytokines (like TNF-?
and IL-6) and chemoattractants (mcp-1) as an 
example of this type of pathogens, resulting in the initiation and progression 
of cardiac pathology.
The reduced myocardial contractility after STZD was 
accompanied with the increased reactive responsiveness of isolated aorta and 
mesenteric artery to phenylephrine, with increased production of chemoattractive 
proteins directly in the myocardium, with increased activity of peripheral 
beta-N-acetyl-glucosaminidase (NAGA), as representative of lysosomal activation 
processes.
The pretreatment of SME1EC2 reduced increase in vascular reactivity, 
reduced myocardial depression and protected against myocardial toxicity.
CONCLUSION: The newly identified and specific cardiac protectant SMe1EC2 could 
serve as a prospective target in the treatment of increased myocardial cytokine 
and chemoattractive proteins in diabetic cardiomyopathy.
PMID: 18999900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Oxytocin induces long-term depression on the rat dentate gyrus: Possible ATPase and ectoprotein kinase mediation 1. Brain Res Bull. 2002 Jun;58(2):141-7. doi: 10.1016/s0361-9230(01)00748-1.

Oxytocin induces long-term depression on the rat dentate gyrus: possible ATPase 
and ectoprotein kinase mediation.

Dubrovsky B(1)
 Harris J, Gijsbers K, Tatarinov A.
Author information:
(1)McGill University, Montreal, Que., Canada.
bdubro@po-box.mcgill.ca

We studied the effects of the neuropeptide oxytocin (OT) on the long-term 
potentiation (LTP) paradigm in the dentate gyrus (DG) of urethane anesthetized 
rats.
Intracerebroventricular injection of 1 microg of the hormone in 1 microl 
of physiological solution 2min before tetanization produced a significant 
decrease in both components of the perforant path evoked potentials (EP) in the 
DG.
The effects appeared right after the tetanization stimuli and were more 
pronounced in the excitatory postsynaptic components of the EPs.
The decrements 
lasted for the 2h of recording time.
We concluded that OT induced and maintained 
long-term depression on the DG.
In contrast, injection of OT in the absence of 
tetanic stimulation did not significantly affect perforant path EP in the DG.
The results are discussed taking particular consideration of the inhibitory 
effects the OT has on (Ca(2+)+Mg(2+)) ATPase at membrane levels and the 
potential interference that this action may have with phosphorylation processes 
via an ectoprotein kinase isolated from membranes of hippocampal pyramidal 
neurons.
Blocking of this ectoprotein kinase in vitro significantly impairs 
establishment and maintenance of LTP.
DOI: 10.1016/s0361-9230(01)00748-1
PMID: 12127011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Search activity in the context of psychosomatic disturbances
 of brain monoamines and REM sleep function 1.
Pavlov J Biol Sci.
1984 Jan-Mar;19(1):1-15. doi: 10.1007/BF03003101.
Search activity in the context of psychosomatic disturbances, of brain 
monoamines and REM sleep function.
Rotenberg VS.
The author discusses a number of controversial aspects of the search activity 
concept.
This concept, based on an analysis of data cited by other researchers 
and the results of the author's own investigation, performed together with V. V. 
Arshavsky, postulates that search activity raises the body's resistance to 
stress and experimentally induced pathology whereas renunciation of search forms 
a nonspecific predisposition to somatic disturbances (e.g., psychosomatic 
disease).
REM sleep is regarded as a specific form of search activity aimed at 
compensating for the state of renunciation of search in walking.
In this paper 
the author argues that 1) renunciation of search can be accompanied either by 
anxiety or by depression, 2) REM sleep deprivation on a "small platform" raises 
the requirement in REM sleep by producing renunciation of search, 3) during 
search activity brain catecholamine synthesis is stimulated by catabolism 
whereas a state of renunciation of search upsets this feedback system.
The 
actuation of the brain mechanisms of search in REM sleep necessitates a certain 
brain catecholamine level.
If the brain catecholamine level is very high during 
waking behavior due to intensive search activity, the REM sleep requirement is 
low, REM sleep becoming reduced.
After a moderate drop in the brain 
catecholamine level at the initial stage of renunciation of search the 
requirement in REM sleep rises and this phase grows longer.
But at the late 
stage of renunciation of search the brain catecholamine level drops extremely, 
REM sleep shrinking in spite of the great appropriate requirement, and 4) the 
functional insufficiency of REM sleep invites various forms of pathology.
DOI: 10.1007/BF03003101
PMID: 6709399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic Glucocorticoids Increase Hippocampal Vulnerability to Neurotoxicity under Conditions That Produce CA3 Dendritic Retraction But Fail to Impair Spatial Recognition Memory <jats:p>We previously found that chronic stress conditions producing CA3 dendritic retraction and spatial memory deficits make the hippocampus vulnerable to the neurotoxin ibotenic acid (IBO). The purpose of this study was to determine whether exposure to chronic corticosterone (CORT) under conditions that produce CA3 dendritic retraction would enhance CA3 susceptibility to IBO. Male Sprague Dawley rats were chronically treated for 21 d with CORT in drinking water (400 μg/ml)
 and half were given daily injections of phenytoin (40 mg/kg), an antiepileptic drug that prevents CA3 dendritic retraction.
Three days after treatments stopped, IBO was infused into the CA3 region.
Conditions producing CA3 dendritic retraction (CORT and vehicle) exacerbated IBO-induced CA3 damage compared with conditions in which CA3 dendritic retraction was not observed (vehicle and vehicle, vehicle and phenytoin, CORT and phenytoin).
Additionally, spatial recognition memory was assessed using the Y-maze, revealing that conditions producing CA3 dendritic retraction failed to impair spatial recognition memory.
Furthermore, CORT levels in response to a potentially mild stressor (injection and Y-maze exposure) stayed at basal levels and failed to differ among key groups (vehicle and vehicle, CORT and vehicle, CORT and phenytoin), supporting the interpretations that CORT levels were unlikely to have been elevated during IBO infusion and that the neuroprotective actions of phenytoin were not through CORT alterations.
These data are the first to show that conditions with prolonged glucocorticoid elevations leading to structural changes in hippocampal dendritic arbors can make the hippocampus vulnerable to neurotoxic challenges.
These findings have significance for many disorders with elevated glucocorticoids that include depression, schizophrenia, Alzheimer's disease, and Cushing's disease.</jats:p>
Supraoptic Neurosecretory Cells: Adrenergic and Cholinergic Sensitivity <jats:p>Adrenergic and cholinergic agonists and antagonists were applied microelectrophoretically to over 700 neurons in the cat supraoptic nucleus
 20 percent of which were antidromically identified as neurosecretory cells.
Norepinephrine uniformly depressed all sensitive cells.
Acetylcholine caused both muscarinic depression and nicotinic excitation which were antagonized by atropine and dihydro-β-erythroidine, respectively.
These results support the hypothesis that norepinephrine and acetylcholine are directly involved in controlling the release of antidiuretic hormone.</jats:p>
Halothane Decreases the Release of Neuropeptide Y and 3
4-Dihydroxyphenylglycol from Superfused Segments of Dog Pulmonary Artery 1.
Anesthesiology.
1990 Oct;73(4):722-30. doi: 10.1097/00000542-199010000-00019.
Halothane decreases the release of neuropeptide Y and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol 
from superfused segments of dog pulmonary artery.
Rorie DK(1), Hunter LW, Lunn JJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, Minnesota 55905.
Neuropeptide Y (NPY), norepinephrine (NE), and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylglycol 
(DOPEG), the metabolite of NE that arises intraneuronally, were measured in 
superfusates before, during, and after nerve stimulation and in extracts of dog 
pulmonary artery after superfusion and electrical stimulation (ES) at 12, 6, and 
1 Hz.
NE and DOPEG were quantified by high-pressure liquid chromatography with 
electrochemical detection; peptides were quantified by radioimmunoassay.
The 
rate of overflow of NPY, NE, and DOPEG into superfusate was measured over time.
The overflow of DOPEG into superfusate during basal conditions was 3.0 times 
that of NE.
Efflux of DOPEG and NPY increased during ES; peak effluxes were not 
reached, however, until after cessation of stimulation.
NE efflux peaked during 
ES.
Effluxes of NE, NPY, and DOPEG were frequency-dependent at 12 and 6 Hz; at 1 
Hz efflux of only NE was greater than basal.
Halothane decreased significantly 
the rates of NPY and DOPEG efflux during and after 12 Hz ES; DOPEG efflux evoked 
by 6 Hz stimulation was also decreased by halothane.
The percentage of the total 
tissue content of NPY that overflowed was decreased by halothane.
Halothane did 
not affect the molar ratios of NE:DOPEG or NE:NPY during basal conditions or ES.
These studies provide evidence that halothane slows efflux of NPY that is 
released along with NE from dog pulmonary artery during high frequencies of 
stimulation.
Halothane also reduces the metabolism of NE to DOPEG.
DOI: 10.1097/00000542-199010000-00019
PMID: 2221441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Potassium translocation and spreading depression induced by electrical stimulation of the brain 1. Exp Neurol. 1987 Aug;97(2):345-64. doi: 10.1016/0014-4886(87)90095-1.

Potassium translocation and spreading depression induced by electrical 
stimulation of the brain.

Reid KH
 Marrannes R, De Prins E, Wauquier A.

Cathodal current pulses with durations from 20 ms to 80 s were applied to the 
surface of rat parietal neocortex, and the strength-duration properties of the 
threshold stimulus for initiation of spreading depression was determined.
In one 
series, extradural stimulation was used.
In a second series, a liquid electrode 
was used, the dura was opened, and K+-sensitive microelectrodes were used to 
determine the time course of extracellular K+ concentration during and after 
each stimulus pulse.
With the dura open, the strength-duration curve was of the 
form It0.55 = constant.
With extradural stimulation, the slope of the log-log 
plot relating current intensity to pulse duration changed gradually as the pulse 
duration increased, averaging 0.63.
Theoretical analysis suggests that diffusion 
of K+ away from a zone of current-induced accumulation can account for these 
slope data.
Applicability of this mechanism of K+ accumulation to observed 
changes in sensitivity of neurons to repeated stimulation at subcortical sites 
is considered.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-4886(87)90095-1
PMID: 3609218 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chelidonic acid evokes antidepressant-like effect through the up-regulation of BDNF in forced swimming test <jats:p> Depression is usually accompanied by neuro-inflammatory reactions. Chelidonic acid
 in particular, has shown anti-inflammatory effects.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the anti-depressant effects of chelidonic acid and to discuss the potential mechanisms of a forced swimming test.
Chelidonic acid was administered orally once a day for 14 days.
On the 14th day, chelidonic acid resulted in a significant decrease in immobility time during the forced swimming test without alteration of locomotor activity, in an open field test.
Chelidonic acid also increased the number of nissl bodies in the hippocampus.
Brain-derived neurotrophic factor expression and extracellular signal-regulated protein kinase phosphorylation in the hippocampus were up-regulated by the administration of chelidonic acid.
Chelidonic acid administration significantly increased the mRNA expression of hippocampal estrogen receptor-β.
The levels of hippocampal interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis factor-α were effectively attenuated by the administration of chelidonic acid.
In addition, chelidonic acid significantly increased the levels of 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin), dopamine, and norepinephrine compared with those levels for the mice that were administered distilled water in the hippocampus.
These results suggest that chelidonic acid might serve as a new therapeutic strategy for the regulation of depression associated with inflammation.
</jats:p>
Orexins/hypocretins control bistability of hippocampal long‐term synaptic plasticity through co‐activation of multiple kinases <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p><jats:bold>Aim: </jats:bold> Orexins/hypocretins (OX/Hcrt) are hypothalamic neuropeptides linking sleep–wakefulness
 appetite and neuroendocrine control.
Their role and mechanisms of action on higher brain functions, such as learning and memory, are not clear.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Methods: </jats:bold> We used field recordings of excitatory post‐synaptic potentials (fEPSP) in acute mouse brain slice preparations to study the effects of orexins and pharmacological inhibitors of multiple kinases on long‐term synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Results: </jats:bold> Orexin‐A (OX‐A) but not orexin‐B (OX‐B) induces a state‐dependent long‐term potentiation of synaptic transmission (LTP<jats:sub>OX</jats:sub>) at Schaffer collateral‐CA1 synapses in hippocampal slices from adult (8‐ to 12‐week‐old) mice.
In contrast, OX‐A applied to slices from juvenile (3‐ to 4‐week‐old) animals causes a long‐term depression (LTD<jats:sub>OX</jats:sub>) in the same pathway.
LTP<jats:sub>OX</jats:sub> is blocked by pharmacological inhibition of orexin receptor‐1 (OX1R) and plasticity‐related kinases, including serine/threonine‐ (CaMKII, PKC, PKA, MAPK), lipid‐ (PI3K), and receptor tyrosine kinases (Trk).
Inhibition of OX1R, CaMKII, PKC, PKA and Trk unmasks LTD<jats:sub>OX</jats:sub> in adult animals.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Conclusion: </jats:bold> Orexins control not only the bistability of arousal states and threshold for appetitive behaviours but, in an age‐ and kinase‐dependent manner, also bidirectional long‐term synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus, providing a possible link between behavioural state and memory functions.</jats:p>
Depression of Whole Blood Folate Activity by Colchicine. 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1965 Oct;120(1):13-6. doi: 10.3181/00379727-120-30430.

Depression of whole blood folate activity by colchicine.

Luketic GC
 Santini R Jr, Butterworth CE Jr.

DOI: 10.3181/00379727-120-30430
PMID: 4954939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant-like effect of the novel thiadiazolidinone NP031115 in mice 1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Aug 1;32(6):1549-56. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2008.05.020. Epub 2008 Jun 25.

Antidepressant-like effect of the novel thiadiazolidinone NP031115 in mice.

Rosa AO(1)
 Kaster MP, Binfaré RW, Morales S, Martín-Aparicio E, Navarro-Rico 
ML, Martinez A, Medina M, García AG, López MG, Rodrigues AL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Medicine, Universidad Autónoma de 
Madrid, Calle Arzobispo Morcillo 4, 28029, Madrid, Spain.
angelo_oscar@hotmail.com

Glycogen synthase kinase-3beta (GSK-3beta) is an enzyme that phosphorylates 
glycogen synthase, thereby inhibiting glycogen synthesis.
Besides this role, it 
is now believed that this enzyme plays an important role in the pathophysiology 
of many brain diseases including depression.
Some inhibitors of this enzyme have 
shown antidepressant effects in animal models.
This study investigated the 
effects of a novel thiadiazolidinone NP031115, a putative GSK-3beta inhibitor, 
and the well-established GSK-3beta inhibitor AR-A014418 in the mouse forced 
swimming test (FST), a model widely used to evaluate antidepressant activity.
We 
found that NP031115 had an IC50 of 1.23 and 6.5 microM for GSK-3beta and 
GSK-3alpha, respectively.
NP031115 (0.5 and 5 mg/kg, i.p.
), in a way similar to 
imipramine (15 mg/kg, i.p), fluoxetine (32 mg/kg, i.p), AR-A014418 (9 mg/kg, 
i.p.
), and rosiglitazone (5 microg/site, i.c.v.
), significantly reduced 
immobility time in the FST.
NP031115 at the higher dose and AR-A014418 (9 mg/kg, 
i.p.)
reduced locomotion in the open-field test.
Rosiglitazone (30 microM), 
AR-A014418 (1 microM), PG(J2) (10 microM), and NP031115 (1, 10 and 25 microM) 
activate PPARgamma in CHO transfected cells.
GW-9662 (10 microg/site, i.c.v, a 
PPARgamma antagonist) administered 15 min before NP03115 (5 mg/kg, i.p.)
or 
co-administered with rosiglitazone (5 microg/site, i.c.v.)
prevented the 
antidepressant-like effect of these drugs in the FST.
The results of this study 
show that NP031115 can exhibit an antidepressant effect, likely by inhibiting 
GSK-3beta and enhancing PPARgamma activity.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2008.05.020
PMID: 18579278 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
EFFECTS OF STEROID SUPPRESSION AND GONADECTOMY ON ADRENAL 5α-REDUCTASE ACTIVITY AND CORTICOSTERONE PRODUCTION IN RATS <jats:title>ABSTRACT</jats:title>
        <jats:p>Studies were conducted to further examine the interaction between gonadal hormones and ACTH in the regulation of adrenocortical function. Gonadectomy for a period of two weeks in pre-puberal rats of either sex or in adults for one week
 was without effect on adrenal 5α-reductase activity and corticosterone production <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic>.
Cortisone administration to intact rats, both before and after puberty, suppressed corticosterone and total steroid production and increased adrenal reductase activity.
Ovariectomy in immature or adult females did not modify the effects of cortisone on adrenal function.
Orchiectomy, both before and after puberty, synergistically enhanced the actions of cortisone to increase 5α-reductase activity and lower corticosterone production without affecting total steroid output.
These observations lend support to the hypothesis that gonadal hormones interact with ACTH in the control of adrenocortical function.
Adrenal 5α-reductase seems to be a common site of action for the effects.</jats:p>
Synaptic Adaptation to Repeated Hypoglycemia Depends on the Utilization of Monocarboxylates in Guinea Pig Hippocampal Slices <jats:p>This report provides in vitro evidence that synaptic activity becomes resistant to repeated hypoglycemia
 i.e., hypoglycemic synaptic adaptation occurs.
Synaptic function was estimated by the amplitude of the postsynaptic population spike (PS) recorded in the granule cell layer of guinea pig hippocampal slices.
ATP, phosphocreatine (PCr), glycogen, and glucose concentrations were measured to investigate energy metabolism homeostasis.
Glucose deprivation produced a complete elimination of the PS amplitude, with a 50% inhibition by 10.6 min, and a ∼15% reduction in ATP and PCr concentrations.
Low-glucose (0.5–1 mmol/l) medium gradually depressed the PS.
After recovery from glucose depletion, repeated glucose deprivation produced a slowly developing depression of PS, with a 50% inhibition by 36.5 min.
However, ATP and PCr concentrations were maintained.
Incubation in secondary low-glucose medium maintained PS amplitude.
Hippocampal glycogen and glucose concentrations promptly decreased during repeated glucose deprivation, indicating that glycogenolysis does not fuel synaptic adaptation to repeated hypoglycemia.
Synaptic function during repeated glucose depletion was reversibly depressed by addition of α-cyano-4-hydroxycinnamic acid or 3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine, inhibitors of the monocarboxylate transporter.
Replacement of extracellular glucose with Na-lactate or Na-pyruvate sustained synaptic transmission after transient glucose depletion.
These results indicate that synaptic utilization of monocarboxylates sustains hypoglycemic synaptic adaptation.</jats:p>
Anatomical observation of six calves affected with segmental aplasia of the spinal cord <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Four male and two female Holstein‐Friesian calves with segmental aplasia of the spinal cord were examined macroscopically and radiographically
 and in some cases also histologically.
External symptoms included inability to stand, deep depression of the body near the middle of the back but without any blemish in the skin, and slight reduction of the body length.
Both hind limbs were almost normal.
In every case segmental aplasia of the spinal cord was observed between the caudal thoracic and the cranial lumbar region.
Owing to this defect, the vertebrae of that limited area consisted only of the body and the ribs fused on both sides.
The sternum showed abnormal ossification at its caudal part.
Other defects were observed such as kyphoscoliosis (six cases), polycystic kidney (one case), cryptorchidism (one case), and XX/XY chimerism (one case).
From these findings it was apparent that this anomaly was uniquely different from the other two main spinal cord anomalies, spina bifida and perosomus elumbis.
One conceivable pathogenesis of this rare anomaly, it was conjectured, is as follows: This anomaly results primarily from a segmental disorder of the neural tube, probably due to vascular problems, whereby a part of the spinal cord fails to develop properly from its normal genesis.
Anomalous shapes of the vertebral column and ribs are perhaps secondary defects caused by aplasia of the spinal cord.</jats:p>
Tetrandrine and Isotetrandrine
 Two Bisbenzyltetrahydroisoquinoline Alkaloids from <i>Menispermaceae</i>, with Rat Uterine Smooth Muscle Relaxant Activity <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>The effects of two bisbenzyltetrahydroisoquinoline alkaloids, 1S, 1′S tetrandrine and its isomer 1R, 1′S isotetrandrine, were investigated in rat isolated uterus in order to identify the mechanism of relaxant action and to study the influence of the absolute configuration on the activity of these alkaloids.
Both inhibited the uterine contraction induced by high K+, acetylcholine and oxytocin.
In Ca2+-free medium, isotetrandrine relaxed the sustained contraction induced by oxytocin but tetrandrine did not.
The relaxant effects of the alkaloids may be due to blockade of calcium influx through specific channels.
Tetrandrine and isotetrandrine modify the calcium channel in a nonreversible manner whilst only isotetrandrine acts intracellularly.
Tetrandrine shows a more specific relaxant activity as a calcium entry blocker.</jats:p>
The effect of actinomycin D on the increased total hydroxyprolinuria in healing rachitic rats 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1969 Nov 18;192(2):252-7. doi: 
10.1016/0304-4165(69)90362-6.

The effects of actinomycin D on the increased total hydroxyprolinuria in healing 
rachitic rats.

Parsons V
 Davies C, Jenkins M.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-4165(69)90362-6
PMID: 5370019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of thiofedrine on platelet aggregation
 thromboxane B2 and 6-keto-PGF1 alpha in rats.
1.
Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol.
1996 Jun;18(5):297-300.
Effects of thiofedrine on platelet aggregation, thromboxane B2 and 6-keto-PGF1 
alpha in rats.
Qu YZ(1), Wang YE, Li XX.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Inner Mongolia Medical College, Huhhot, China.
Thiofedrine inhibited rat platelet aggregation and intraplatelet thromboxane B2 
(TxB2) generation induced by arachidonic acid.
The IC50 values were 0.18 and 
0.21 mmol/l, respectively.
Thiofedrine, 1.25-5.00 mg/kg i.v., showed a 
significant inhibition of rat platelet aggregation and intraplatelet TxB2 
generation induced by arachidonic acid, with ID50 values of 2.4 and 3.3 mg/kg.
Thiofedrine, 0.5-2.0 mg/kg i.v., reduced TxB2 generation but increased 
6-keto-PGF1 alpha formation in rat plasma.
PMID: 8817463 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant-like effect of Salvia sclarea is explained by modulation of dopamine activities in rats 1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Jul 6;130(1):187-90. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.04.035.
Epub  2010 May 2.

Antidepressant-like effect of Salvia sclarea is explained by modulation of 
dopamine activities in rats.

Seol GH(1)
 Shim HS, Kim PJ, Moon HK, Lee KH, Shim I, Suh SH, Min SS.
Author information:
(1)Department of Basic Nursing Science, Korea University School of Nursing, 
Seoul 136-713, South Korea.
AIM OF THE STUDY: The purpose of the present study was to screen aromatic 
essential oils that have antidepressant effects to identify the regulatory 
mechanisms of selected essential oils.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The antidepressant effects of essential oils of Anthemis 
nobilis (chamomile), Salvia sclarea (clary sage; clary), Rosmarinus officinalis 
(rosemary), and Lavandula angustifolia (lavender) were assessed using a forced 
swim test (FST) in rats.
Rats were treated with essential oils by 
intraperitoneal injection or inhalation.
Serum levels of corticosterone were 
assessed by enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA).
RESULTS: Among the essential oils tested, 5% (v/v) clary oil had the strongest 
anti-stressor effect in the FST.
We further investigated the mechanism of clary 
oil antidepression by pretreatment with agonists or antagonists to serotonin 
(5-HT), dopamine (DA), adrenaline, and GABA receptors.
The anti-stressor effect 
of clary oil was significantly blocked by pretreatment with buspirone (a 
5-HT(1A) agonist), SCH-23390 (a D(1) receptor antagonist) and haloperidol (a 
D(2), D(3), and D(4) receptor antagonist).
CONCLUSIONS: Our findings indicate that clary oil could be developed as a 
therapeutic agent for patients with depression and that the antidepressant-like 
effect of clary oil is closely associated with modulation of the DAnergic 
pathway.
Copyright (c) 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.04.035
PMID: 20441789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
EFFECT OF HYDROXYLATION BLOCKING AGENTS ON CORTICOIDS CONCENTRATION IN THE PIGEON ADRENALS 1. Endocrinol Jpn. 1967 Sep;14(3):265-8. doi: 10.1507/endocrj1954.14.265.

Effect of hydroxylation blocking agents on corticoids concentration in the 
pigeon adrenals.

Bhattacharyya T
 Sarkar A, Ghosh A.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj1954.14.265
PMID: 5630632 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Excitatory stimulation during postsynaptic inhibition induces long-term depression in hippocampus in vivo <jats:p> 1. As part of an effort to evaluate the biological plausibility of theoretically derived principles of synaptic modification
 we studied activity-dependent long-term depression (LTD) of glutamatergic transmission in the hippocampus of anesthetized adult rats.
Field potentials of CA1 pyramidal cells evoked by single-pulse stimulation (0.1 Hz) of the commissural afferents were recorded before and after paired-pulse stimulation (0.5 Hz) of the same pathway.
A train of 150 or 200 paired pulses produced robust LTD of the commissural input to the CA1 pyramidal neurons when the interstimulus interval (ISI) of the pairs was short (25 ms) but not when the ISI was long (1,000 ms).
2.
Paired-pulse stimulation with the short but not with the long ISI also was associated with pronounced inhibition of pyramidal cell firing upon the second pulse of a pair, despite the fact that the excitatory input was facilitated with the short-ISI paradigm.
The inhibition of pyramidal cell activity was mediated by input to the pyramidal cells from local gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)-releasing interneurons activated by commissural fibers and/or CA1 recurrent collaterals, because the inhibition was eliminated by local administration of the selective GABAA receptor antagonist, bicuculline (50 microM), near the recording site.
3.
Postsynaptic input from GABAergic interneurons was necessary for the induction of LTD, because short-ISI paired-pulse stimulation failed to produce LTD in the presence of bicuculline.
4.
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor-mediated excitation also was necessary for the induction of LTD, because administration of the selective NMDA receptor antagonist, D-2-amino-5-phosphonvaleric acid (100 microM), near the recording site prevented the development of LTD.(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </jats:p>
Action of 5-Hydroxytryptamine
 Histamine and Methergoline on Phagocytosis 1.
Pharmacology.
1974;11(4):199-206. doi: 10.1159/000136490.
Action of 5-hydroxytryptamine, histamine and methergoline on phagocytosis.
Cassone MC, Fundaro' A, Molinengo L.

DOI: 10.1159/000136490
PMID: 4218646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A Bayesian statistical analysis of behavioral facilitation associated with deep brain stimulation 1. J Neurosci Methods. 2009 Oct 15;183(2):267-76. doi: 
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2009.06.028. Epub 2009 Jul 2.

A Bayesian statistical analysis of behavioral facilitation associated with deep 
brain stimulation.

Smith AC(1)
 Shah SA, Hudson AE, Purpura KP, Victor JD, Brown EN, Schiff ND.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, University of California, 
Davis, CA 95616, USA.
annesmith@ucdavis.edu

Deep brain stimulation (DBS) is an established therapy for Parkinson's Disease 
and is being investigated as a treatment for chronic depression, obsessive 
compulsive disorder and for facilitating functional recovery of patients in 
minimally conscious states following brain injury.
For all of these 
applications, quantitative assessments of the behavioral effects of DBS are 
crucial to determine whether the therapy is effective and, if so, how 
stimulation parameters can be optimized.
Behavioral analyses for DBS are 
challenging because subject performance is typically assessed from only a small 
set of discrete measurements made on a discrete rating scale, the time course of 
DBS effects is unknown, and between-subject differences are often large.
We 
demonstrate how Bayesian state-space methods can be used to characterize the 
relationship between DBS and behavior comparing our approach with logistic 
regression in two experiments: the effects of DBS on attention of a macaque 
monkey performing a reaction-time task, and the effects of DBS on motor behavior 
of a human patient in a minimally conscious state.
The state-space analysis can 
assess the magnitude of DBS behavioral facilitation (positive or negative) at 
specific time points and has important implications for developing principled 
strategies to optimize DBS paradigms.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2009.06.028
PMCID: PMC2743761
PMID: 19576932 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effects of a standardized Acanthopanax koreanum extract on stress-induced behavioral alterations in mice 1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2013 Jul 30;148(3):826-34. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.05.019. 
Epub 2013 May 27.

The effects of a standardized Acanthopanax koreanum extract on stress-induced 
behavioral alterations in mice.

Jung JM(1)
 Park SJ, Lee YW, Lee HE, Hong SI, Lew JH, Hong E, Shim JS, Cheong 
JH, Ryu JH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Life and Nanopharmaceutical Sciences, Kyung Hee University, 
Seoul 130-701, Republic of Korea.
ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The roots and stem bark of Acanthopanax koreanum 
Nakai (Araliaceae), a well-known herbal medicine in Jeju Island, Korea, has been 
used as a tonic agent in treating stress-related states.
Despite its popular 
application, the anti-anxiety or anti-depressive action of Acanthopanax koreanum 
is not yet known.
AIM OF THE STUDY: This study aimed to determine the effects of Acanthopanax 
koreanum on stress-induced behavioral alterations such as anxiety and 
depression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mice in the acute stress group were exposed to 
immobilization stress for 2h followed by electric foot shocks (0.5 mA in 1 s 
duration with a 10 s inter-shock interval) for 2 min, while sub-chronically 
stressed mice were exposed to these stresses for 2 weeks, once per day.
70% 
ethanolic extract of Acanthopanax koreanum (EEAK) (25, 50, 100, or 200 mg/kg) 
was administered once or sub-chronically (for 2 weeks) 1h prior to stress 
induction.
Anxiety- or depression-like behavioral changes were evaluated using 
the elevated plus-maze (EPM) test and the forced swimming test (FST) a day after 
the final stress induction.
Corticosterone levels and spleen weight were 
measured after conducting all the behavioral assays.
The numbers of BrdU- or 
DCX-immunopositive cells in the hippocampal region of sub-chronically stressed 
mice were measured 2 days after EEAK treatment.
RESULTS: The percentage of time spent in the open arms was decreased in both the 
acutely and chronically stressed mice.
In the FST, the immobility time was 
increased by only chronic stress, but not by acute stress.
Acute or sub-chronic 
administration of EEAK significantly prevented the anxiety- or depression-like 
behavioral changes caused by stress.
EEAK also attenuated stress-induced 
decrease and increase of spleen weight and corticosterone levels, respectively.
Furthermore, the sub-chronic administration of EEAK (100 or 200 mg/kg, for 2 
weeks) increased the number of BrdU-, doublecortin-, and neuropeptide Y-positive 
cells in the hippocampal region of the sub-chronically stressed mice.
CONCLUSION: EEAK attenuated the behavioral and biochemical changes in acute or 
sub-chronic stressed mice.
These results suggest the therapeutic potential of 
Acanthopanax koreanum for the treatment of stress-related neuropsychiatric 
disorders including anxiety disorders or major depressive disorder.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2013.05.019
PMID: 23721913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of early visual deprivation on the recovery cycle of evoked potentials to photic stimuli in the rabbit cortex]. 1. Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlova. 1977 Sep-Oct;27(5):1068-74.

[Effect of early visual deprivation on the recovery cycle of evoked potentials 
to photic stimuli in the rabbit cortex].

[Article in Russian]

Zislina NN.

The influence of visual deprivation on the recovery cycle of the primary 
positive component (P1) of the visual evoked potential under conditions of dark 
or light adaptation was studied on eight adult unanaesthetized rabbits raised in 
darkness. The EP recovery cycle of visually deprived animals
 studied in 
conditions of dark adaption, reveals a significant shortening (as compared with 
normal) of the initial depression period of testing responses.
At the same time 
a significant lengthening of the facilitation phase and a sharp exaltation of 
the testing responses is observed.
Unlike the norm, transition from dark- to 
light-adaptation of the deprived animals does not bring about any essential 
changes in the recovery cycle.
An assumption is made that visual deprivation 
leads to a reduced effectiveness of the processes of successive inhibition.
It 
is also assumed that enhanced excitabilty of a part of the cortical elements, 
apparently in the system of recurrent excitation, is likely to be one of the 
consequences of deprivation.
PMID: 930403 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of serotonergic input to the ventrolateral medulla in expression of the 10-Hz sympathetic nerve rhythm <jats:p> We studied the changes in inferior cardiac sympathetic nerve discharge (SND) produced by unilateral microinjections of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) receptor agonists and antagonists into the ventrolateral medulla (VLM) of urethane-anesthetized
 baroreceptor-denervated cats.
Microinjection of the 5-HT2 receptor antagonist LY-53857 (10 mM) into either the rostral or caudal VLM significantly reduced ( P ≤ 0.05) the 10-Hz rhythmic component of basal SND without affecting its lower-frequency, aperiodic component.
The selective depression of 10-Hz power was accompanied by a statistically significant decrease in mean arterial pressure (MAP).
Microinjection of LY-53857 into the VLM also attenuated the increase in 10-Hz power that followed tetanic stimulation of depressor sites in the caudal medullary raphé nuclei.
Microinjection of the 5-HT2 receptor agonist 1-(2,5-dimethoxy-4-iodophenyl)2-amino-propane (DOI; 10 μM) into the VLM selectively enhanced 10-Hz SND, and intravenous DOI (1 mg/kg) partially reversed the reduction in 10-Hz SND produced by 5-HT2 receptor blockade in the VLM.
Microinjection of the 5-HT1A receptor agonist, 8-hydroxy-2-(di- n-propylamino)tetralin (8-OHDPAT; 10 mM), into either the rostral or caudal VLM also selectively attenuated 10-Hz SND and significantly reduced MAP.
The reduction in 10-Hz SND produced by 8-OHDPAT was partially reversed by intravenous WAY-100635 (1 mg/kg), which selectively blocks 5-HT1A receptors.
These results support the view that serotonergic inputs to the VLM play an important role in expression of the 10-Hz rhythm in SND.
</jats:p>
Puberty
 Ovarian Steroids, and Stress <jats:p><jats:bold>A<jats:sc>bstract</jats:sc>: </jats:bold> Puberty is accompanied by a number of changes, among them increased risk for development of major depression.
The most common etiology of major depression is stressful life events, being present in approximately 90% of first episodes of depression.
The hypothalamic‐pituitary‐adrenal (HPA) axis is one of the major systems involved in responses to stress, and this system is clearly influenced by ovarian hormones.
Normal women demonstrate resistance to negative feedback of both cortisol in the fast‐feedback paradigm and dexamethasone in the standard delayed‐feedback paradigm.
Depressed premenopausal women show greater increases in baseline cortisol than postmenopausal depressed women and than depressed men.
Studies in rodents suggest a similar resistance to glucocorticoid feedback but suggest that estradiol can function to inhibit stress responsiveness.
Studies of premenopausal depressed women demonstrate lower estradiol, which suggests that there is less inhibitory feedback of estradiol on the HPA axis, while normal progesterone continues to augment stress responses further.
The onset of these reproductive hormonal changes modulating stress systems at puberty may sensitize girls to stressful life events, which become more frequent at the transition to puberty and young adulthood.</jats:p>
Distinct Age-Dependent Effects of Methylphenidate on Developing and Adult Prefrontal Neurons 1. Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Nov 15;72(10):880-8. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.04.018.  Epub 2012 May 19.

Distinct age-dependent effects of methylphenidate on developing and adult 
prefrontal neurons.

Urban KR(1)
 Waterhouse BD, Gao WJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Anatomy, Drexel University College of 
Medicine, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania 19129, USA.
Erratum in
    Biol Psychiatry.
2013 Mar 15;73(6):591.
BACKGROUND: Methylphenidate (MPH) has long been used to treat 
attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD); however, its cellular 
mechanisms of action and potential effects on prefrontal cortical circuitry are 
not well understood, particularly in the developing brain system.
A clinically 
relevant dose range for rodents has been established in the adult animal; 
however, how this range will translate to juvenile animals has not been 
established.
METHODS: Juvenile (postnatal day [PD] 15) and adult (PD90) Sprague Dawley rats 
were treated with MPH or saline.
Whole-cell patch clamp recording was used to 
examine the neuronal excitability and synaptic transmission in pyramidal neurons 
of prefrontal cortex.
Recovery from MPH treatment was also examined at 1, 5, and 
10 weeks following drug cessation.
RESULTS: A dose of 1 mg/kg intraperitoneal MPH, either single dose or chronic 
treatment (well within the accepted therapeutic range for adults), produced 
significant depressive effects on pyramidal neurons by increasing 
hyperpolarization-activated currents in juvenile rat prefrontal cortex, while 
exerting excitatory effects in adult rats.
Minimum clinically-relevant doses 
(.03 to .3 mg/kg) also produced depressive effects in juvenile rats, in a linear 
dose-dependent manner.
Function recovered within 1 week from chronic 1 mg/kg 
treatment, chronic treatment with 3 and 9 mg/kg resulted in depression of 
prefrontal neurons lasting 10 weeks and beyond.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the juvenile prefrontal cortex is 
supersensitive to methylphenidate, and the accepted therapeutic range for adults 
is an overshoot.
Juvenile treatment with MPH may result in long-lasting, 
potentially permanent, changes to excitatory neuron function in the prefrontal 
cortex of juvenile rats.
Copyright © 2012 Society of Biological Psychiatry.
Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2012.04.018
PMCID: PMC3433628
PMID: 22609367 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing interests: The authors declare no 
biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.
5-H&lt;sub&gt;T2A&lt;/sub&gt; Receptor Activation Leads to Increased BDNF mRNA Expression in C6 Glioma Cells 1. Neuromolecular Med. 2002;1(3):197-205. doi: 10.1385/NMM:1:3:197.

5-HT2A receptor activation leads to increased BDNF mRNA expression in C6 glioma 
cells.

Meller R(1)
 Babity JM, Grahame-Smith DG.
Author information:
(1)Smithkline Beecham Centre for Applied Neuropsychobiology, University 
Department of Clinical Pharmacology, Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford.
rmeller@downneurobiology.org

It has recently been suggested that an increase in brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) expression may mediate some of the therapeutic effect of 
antidepressant drugs, via their effects on the neurotransmitter 
5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT).
However, because it is unclear whether 5-HT 
manipulations directly affect BDNF expression, we examined BDNF mRNA levels in 
C6 glioma cells following incubation with 5-HT using reverse transcription 
polymerase chain reaction (RT-PCR) and Northern blot analysis.
Incubation of C6 
glioma cells with 5-HT increased the BDNF mRNA expression approx twofold.
The 
effect of 5-HT (100 microM) was inhibited by a 5-HT2A receptor antagonist 
(ketanserin; 1 microM).
The RNA synthesis inhibitor (actinomycin D; 10 
microg/mL), but not a protein synthesis inhibitor (cycloheximide; 0.5 microg/mL) 
blocked the effect of 5-HT.
Furthermore, incubation of C6 glioma cells with EGTA 
(1 mM), a protein kinase inhibitor (staurosporine; 1 microM), the Ca2+ ATPase 
inhibitor thapsigargin (1 microM), or a calcium/calmodulin-dependent kinase 
inhibitor (KN 62; 1 microM) inhibited the response to 5-HT.
Our data show that 
5-HT increases de novo BDNF mRNA synthesis following direct activation of the 
5-HT2A receptor, via a calcium-dependent and protein kinase-dependent pathway.
DOI: 10.1385/NMM:1:3:197
PMID: 12095161 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Abstracts of the 16th International Congress of ESCAP European Society for Child and Adolescent Psychiatry 1. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2015 Jun;24 Suppl 1:1-303. doi: 
10.1007/s00787-015-0714-4.

Abstracts of the 16th International Congress of ESCAP European Society for Child 
and Adolescent Psychiatry.

[No authors listed]

DOI: 10.1007/s00787-015-0714-4
PMID: 26022212
Importance of an Intact Growth Hormone/Insulin-Like Growth Factor 1 Axis for Normal Post-Infarction Healing: Studies in Dwarf Rats<sup>1</sup> 1. Endocrinology. 2001 Jan;142(1):332-8. doi: 10.1210/endo.142.1.7913.

Importance of an intact growth hormone/insulin-like growth factor 1 axis for 
normal post-infarction healing: studies in dwarf rats.

Cittadini A(1)
 Grossman JD, Strömer H, Katz SE, Morgan JP, Douglas PS.
Author information:
(1)Charles A. Dana Research Institute and the Harvard-Thorndike Laboratory, 
Department of Medicine (Cardiovascular Division) of Beth Israel Hospital, 
Harvard Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts 02215, USA.
Treatment with GH attenuates remodeling and improves left ventricular function 
in the setting of experimental heart failure following coronary ligation.
This 
study was designed to test the hypothesis that an intact GH/insulin-like growth 
factor 1 (IGF-1) axis is required for normal myocardial infarction healing.
Myocardial infarction was induced by coronary ligation in GH-deficient dwarf 
rats and in age-matched controls.
In dwarf rats, serum IGF-1 levels were reduced 
by 50%, and grow rate was 50% less than normal littermates, although no 
differences in myocardial IGF-1 messenger RNA levels were observed compared with 
controls.
All rats underwent transthoracic echocardiography at baseline, 2 
weeks, and 6 weeks after myocardial infarction.
Left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure was obtained by in vivo closed chest catheterization.
At 6 weeks, both 
infarcted groups exhibited similar myocardial infarction size at transthoracic 
echocardiography and at morphometric histology.
In both groups with myocardial 
infarction, there was significant left ventricular dilation and reduced systolic 
function.
However, the extent of remodeling as assessed by the increase in 
end-diastolic dimension (%Delta + 36 +/- 5 vs. +19 +/- 4; P: < 0.01) and 
depression of function (%Delta fractional shortening -12 +/- 2 vs. -7 +/- 1; P: 
< 0.01) were both greater in the dwarf group.
Furthermore, dwarf rats failed to 
develop compensatory hypertrophy of noninfarcted posterior wall (%Delta 
posterior wall +5 +/- 1 vs. +15 +/- 3; P: < 0.01).
Therefore, pathologic left 
ventricular remodeling and functional loss following myocardial infarction is 
more marked in conditions of GH deficiency.
An intact GH/IGF-1 axis appears 
necessary for a normal response to myocardial infarction injury in the rat.
DOI: 10.1210/endo.142.1.7913
PMID: 11145596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Strain Differences in the Behavioral Effects of Antidepressant Drugs in the Rat Forced Swimming Test 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2000 Feb;22(2):191-9. doi: 
10.1016/S0893-133X(99)00100-1.

Strain differences in the behavioral effects of antidepressant drugs in the rat 
forced swimming test.

López-Rubalcava C(1)
 Lucki I.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104, 
USA.
clopez@neuroserver.imp-neuro.edu.mx

Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rats provide a model of stress-induced depressive behavior, 
because they show enhanced vulnerability to the effects of stressors.
The 
present study examined differences in the behavioral response to different types 
of antidepressant drugs between WKY and Sprague-Dawley (SD) rats in the forced 
swimming test (FST).
WKY rats displayed significantly greater immobility than SD 
rats during their exposure to the FST.
The noradrenergic antidepressant, 
desipramine, produced a dose-dependent reduction of immobility and increase of 
climbing behavior in the SD rats.
In WKY rats, desipramine reduced immobility at 
a lower dose and produced increases of both swimming and climbing behavior.
The 
serotonergic compounds, fluoxetine and 8-OH-DPAT, produced dose-dependent 
reductions of immobility and increases of swimming behavior in the FST in SD 
rats, but the response to the serotonergic drugs were blunted in WKY rats.
These 
results indicate that genetic or constitutive differences may determine the 
distinct behavioral profiles for antidepressant compounds with selective 
pharmacological effects in different rat strains, and these effects may be 
related to genetic heterogeneity of antidepressant responses in depressed 
patients.
DOI: 10.1016/S0893-133X(99)00100-1
PMID: 10649831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ureteropyelonephritis in a Friesian mare 1. Vet Rec. 1988 Jun 18;122(25):609-10. doi: 10.1136/vr.122.25.609.

Ureteropyelonephritis in a Friesian mare.

Sloet van Oldruitenborgh-Oosterbaan MM(1)
 Kalsbeek HC.
Author information:
(1)Clinic for Large Animal Medicine, Veterinary Faculty, University of Utrecht, 
The Netherlands.
A 14-year-old Friesian breeding mare had strangury, depression, inappetence, 
neutrophilia and uraemia.
Its urine had a low specific gravity and contained 
protein, blood cells and bacteria.
Rectal examination showed that both kidneys 
and ureters were enlarged.
Post mortem examination confirmed the diagnosis of 
pyelonephritis and revealed that small tumours in the vulva were probably the 
cause of the uropathy.
DOI: 10.1136/vr.122.25.609
PMID: 3407117 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dose-dependent facilitation or supression of rat fighting by methamphetamine
 phenobarbital, or imipramine 1.
Psychopharmacologia.
1972;27(3):213-22. doi: 10.1007/BF00422801.
Dose-dependent facilitation or supression of rat fighting by methamphetamine, 
phenobarbital, or imipramine.
Crowley TJ.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00422801
PMID: 4674515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A Simple and Fast UHPLC–MS-MS Assay for Rapid Determination of Vilazodone in Plasma Sample 1. J Anal Toxicol. 2015 Mar;39(2):106-12. doi: 10.1093/jat/bku126. Epub 2014 Nov 
16.

A simple and fast UHPLC-MS-MS assay for rapid determination of vilazodone in 
plasma sample.

Iqbal M(1)
 Ezzeldin E(2), Al-Rashood KA(3), Bajrai AA(4).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Bioavailability Laboratory, College of 
Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia muziqbal@gmail.com 
muziqbal@ksu.edu.sa.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, College of Pharmacy, King Saud 
University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia Bioavailability Laboratory, College of 
Pharmacy, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(3)Bioavailability Laboratory, College of Pharmacy, King Saud University, 
Riyadh, Saudi Arabia.
(4)Obesity Centre, College of Medicine, King Saud University, Riyadh, Saudi 
Arabia.
Vilazodone is a novel antidepressant agent, approved by the US Food and Drug 
Administration (US FDA) for the treatment of major depressive disorder.
In this 
study, a fast sensitive ultra-high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass 
spectroscopy method was developed and validated for the determination of 
vilazodone in human plasma.
After a simple protein precipitation by 
acetonitrile, both vilazodone and risperidone (internal standard, IS) were 
separated on an Acquity UPLC BEH™ C18 column (50 × 2.1 mm, 1.7 µm).
An isocratic 
mobile phase of acetonitrile:10 mM ammonium acetate (80:20, v/v) was used at the 
0.3 mL/min flow rate.
Both vilazodone and IS were eluted at 0.44 and 0.47 min, 
respectively, having a run time of 1.0 min.
Detection and quantification were 
performed using an electrospray ionization source in positive mode by multiple 
reaction monitoring.
The precursor to product ion transitions were monitored at 
m/z 442.19 > 154.99 for vilazodone and m/z 411.18 > 191.07 for IS, respectively.
The standard curve (0.40-500 ng/mL) was found to be linear with a lower limit of 
quantification 0.40 ng/mL.
All validation results were found to be within 
acceptable limits as per guidelines for bioanalytical method validation (US FDA 
and European Medicines Agency).
To the best of our knowledge, this is the first 
fully validated assay for the determination of vilazodone in human plasma and 
was successfully applied to an oral pharmacokinetic study in rats.
© The Author 2014.
Published by Oxford University Press.
All rights reserved.
For Permissions, please email: journals.permissions@oup.com.
DOI: 10.1093/jat/bku126
PMID: 25404657 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of intracoronary administration of contrast materials on left ventricular function in the presence of severe coronary artery stenosis 1. Cardiovasc Intervent Radiol. 1981;4(2):110-6. doi: 10.1007/BF02552389.

Effects of intracoronary administration of contrast materials on left 
ventricular function in the presence of severe coronary artery stenosis.

Green CE
 Higgins CB, Kelley MJ, Newell JD, Schmidt WS, Haigler F.

The effects of intracoronary administration of contrast materials on regional 
and global left ventricular (LV) function were assessed in anesthetized dogs 
with segmental myocardial ischemia produced by critical stenosis of the 
circumflex coronary artery.
Effects caused by sodium meglumine diatrizoate 
(R76), sodium meglumine calcium metrizoate (ISO), and metrizamide were 
evaluated.
In the nonischemic state R76 produced an early (0-10 seconds) 
decrease in LV contractility followed by a late (10-20 seconds) positive 
inotropic effect.
In the presence of regional ischemia there was prolongation of 
the negative inotropic effect.
ISO produced only positive inotropic effects 
without significant differences between responses in the nonischemic and 
ischemic states.
Metrizamide produced almost no alterations in LV function.
DOI: 10.1007/BF02552389
PMID: 7249015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A neuropharmacologic approach to self-mutilating behavior. 1. J Am Osteopath Assoc. 1975 Feb;74(6):555-7.

A neuropharmacologic approach to self-mutilating behavior.

Coppola RJ
 Rolek DF.
PMID: 1039013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Central injections of the GABA-transaminase inhibitor ethanolamine-O-sulfate (EOS): Effects on brain [14C]2-Deoxy-d-glucose uptake and behavior in rats 1. Brain Res. 1983 Mar 7;262(2):243-52. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(83)91014-4.

Central injections of the GABA-transaminase inhibitor ethanolamine-O-sulfate 
(EOS): effects on brain [14C]2-deoxy-D-glucose uptake and behavior in rats.

Nobrega JN
 Coscina DV.
Brain glucose utilization was examined 24 h after single intracisternal 
injections of the GABA-transaminase inhibitor ethanolamine-O-sulfate (EOS) in 
rats.
Qualitative autoradiography indicated a pronounced and homogeneous 
depression in [14C]2-deoxy-D-glucose ([14C]2DG) uptake throughout the brains of 
rats treated with 200 or 400 micrograms EOS.
Quantitative scintillation counting 
of 14C in 9 brain areas of other rats confirmed the marked, generalized decrease 
in label uptake 24 h after EOS.
Food intake measurements confirmed previous 
reports of dose-dependent anorexia after EOS.
Rats treated with the 200 
micrograms dose showed decreased open-field activity 24 h after injection but no 
other deficits in various tests of sensorimotor function or in 
tail-pinch-induced feeding.
Rats treated with the 400 micrograms dose also 
showed deficits in open-field activity, plus deficits in orientation to touch 
stimuli, longer latencies than controls in catalepsy tests, and faster 
habituation of startle responses to sound.
This group showed normal feeding 
responses to tail-pinch stimulation in the presence of solid food but not in the 
presence of liquid food.
It was concluded that sensorimotor deficits may play 
some role in the anorexigenic effects of EOS but are probably not their primary 
cause.
The discrepancy between the apparent degree of depression of brain 
glucose utilization and the comparatively mild behavioral deficits observed 
would suggest the possibility that metabolic fuels other than glucose may be 
mobilized following central EOS treatment.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(83)91014-4
PMID: 6839155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Psychosocial aspects of xenotransplantation: Survey in adolescent recipients of porcine islet cells 1. Transplant Proc. 2005 Jan-Feb;37(1):521-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.transproceed.2005.01.001.

Psychosocial aspects of xenotransplantation: survey in adolescent recipients of 
porcine islet cells.

Terán-Escandón D(1)
 Terán-Ortiz L, Ormsby-Jenkins C, Evia-Viscarra ML, White 
DJ, Valdés-González-Salas R.

Author information:
(1)Hospital Angeles del Pedregal, Mexico City, Mexico.
dterane@yahoo.com.mx

INTRODUCTION: Transplantation is a process with several psychosocial challenges.
Regarding the case of xenotransplantation, the perceived similarity between 
humans and pigs may be stressful.
Adjustment disorders have been reported among 
transplantation recipients.
We sought to assess the psychosocial aspects of 
xenotransplantation among porcine islet-cell recipients and their efforts to 
adapt themselves to this condition.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Ten insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus patients aged 
14.58 +/- 7.93 who received porcine islet-cells were included.
The bioartificial 
steel/fibrous tissue chamber method was used.
All patients and their relatives 
were interviewed about their expectations, overall functioning, and experiences.
The quality of life, enjoyment, and satisfaction scale and the hospital anxiety 
and depression scales were used.
A 1-year follow-up was done.
RESULTS: Their motivation was centered on autonomy; there were no troubles 
regarding the graft origin.
Xenotransplantation was perceived with pragmatism, 
seeing pigs as an unlimited resource.
The patients with best outcomes also had 
the greatest improvements in several quality of life areas (QOL) while the 
medium responders had fewer QOL improvements.
The nonresponders experienced 
mainly frustration.
Parents' concerns were not related to their children's 
health but to their recently gained autonomy.
CONCLUSIONS: In addition to enthusiasm, the perception of animals as an 
unlimited source of organs may affect patient compliance; in this group, 
xenotransplantation was seen as using as a long-lasting drug, with chamber walls 
considered as a physical, immunologic, and, in certain manner, a psychological 
barrier.
DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2005.01.001
PMID: 15808697 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The behavioral and biochemical sequelae of the removal of the olfactory bulbs in C57Bl/6j mice]. 1. Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlova. 1992 Jul-Aug;42(4):779-87.

[The behavioral and biochemical sequelae of the removal of the olfactory bulbs 
in C57Bl/6j mice].

[Article in Russian]

Gurevich EV
 Bobkova NV, Katkov IuA, Otmakhova NA, Nesterova IV.
Ablation of the olfactory bulbs in mice C57Bl/6j was accompanied by motor and 
orienting-exploratory activity augmentation in the "open field" test and 
deterioration of the learning ability to active and passive avoidance.
The most 
expressed behavioural changes developed in four weeks after the surgery.
Chronic 
administration of antidepressants (amitriptyline, 20 mg/kg; trazodone, 20 mg/kg; 
imipramine, 10 mg/kg; intraperitoneally) normalized behaviour of bulbectomized 
animals, trazodone being the most effective.
In the biochemical studies the 
brainstem serotonin level was found to be decreased and the density of 
5HT2-receptors in the cerebral cortex increased in bulbectomized mice.
Only 
trazodone was able to correct the biochemical indices.
The state of the 
bulbectomized mice is supposed to serve a model of a depression with 
hypo-function of serotonergic system of the brain.
PMID: 1332299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Epigenetics in Suicide and Depression 1. Biol Psychiatry. 2009 Nov 1;66(9):812-3. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.08.033.

Epigenetics in suicide and depression.

Autry AE(1)
 Monteggia LM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, The University of Texas Southwestern Medical 
Center, Dallas, Texas, USA.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2009.08.033
PMCID: PMC2770810
PMID: 19833253 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Carbon tetrachloride-induced early biochemical alterations but not necrosis in pigeon's liver 1. Agents Actions. 1984 Oct;15(3-4):463-6. doi: 10.1007/BF01972389.

Carbon tetrachloride-induced early biochemical alterations but not necrosis in 
pigeon's liver.

Fernández G
 Villarruel MC, de Ferreyra EC, de Fenos OM, Bernacchi AS, de Castro 
CR, Castro JA.
In contrast to what is well known to occur in rats, pigeons receiving CCl4 (1 
ml/kg i.p.)
were not susceptible to necrogenic effects of the hepatotoxin at 24 
h. There were, however, other early biochemical alterations observable, such as 
depression of glucose 6 phosphatase activity, decrease in the cytochrome P-450 
content and in aminopyrine-N-demethylase activity in pigeon liver microsomes at 
3 and 6 h after CCl4 administration.
Pigeon liver was able to activate CCl4 to 
reactive metabolites that bind covalently to lipids, but no CCl4-induced lipid 
peroxidation was proved by the diene hyperconjugation technique in pigeon liver 
microsomes at 1, 3 or 6 h after administration.
Results suggest that covalent 
binding of CCl4-reactive metabolites are more relevant to early biochemical 
alterations induced by CCl4 than is lipid peroxidation.
Absence of CCl4-induced 
necrosis in pigeon liver could be attributable to a smaller intensity of 
covalent binding interactions observed, when compared to susceptible species, 
and to absence of lipid peroxidation.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01972389
PMID: 6098176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of psychotropic drugs on identified septohippocampal neurons 1. Neuroscience. 1988 Dec;27(3):911-20. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(88)90194-7.

Effect of psychotropic drugs on identified septohippocampal neurons.

Bassant MH(1)
 Jobert A, Dutar P, Lamour Y.
Author information:
(1)Unité de Recherches de Neurophysiologie pharmacologique, INSERM U 161, Paris, 
France.
The effects of various psychotropic drugs (benzodiazepines, antidepressants, 
neuroleptics and nootropic drugs, a family of cognition activator agents) on 
firing rates of septohippocampal neurons, identified by electrical antidromic 
stimulation, were studied in the medial septum-nucleus of the diagonal band of 
Broca of rats anaesthetized with urethan.
Extracellular potentials from single 
septohippocampal neurons were recorded using glass pipettes.
Drugs were applied 
by either microiontophoresis or intravenous injections (i.v.).
Benzodiazepines 
produced a marked depression of spontaneous firing rates of septohippocampal 
neurons whether applied i.v.
(diazepam) or iontophoretically (flurazepam, 
midazolam).
In addition, diazepam had a potent depressant effect on the 
rhythmically bursting activity of the septohippocampal neurons.
Baclofen also 
had an inhibitory effect.
Antidepressant drugs (applied by iontophoresis) as 
well as amphetamine, had a depressant effect on spontaneous firing rates.
Neuroleptics (i.v.)
had less significant or consistent effects on 
septohippocampal neurons, although the effects of haloperidol were usually 
inhibitory.
Nootropic drugs were generally ineffective.
These data indicate that 
most psychotropic drugs tested (with the exception of nootropic drugs) have an 
inhibitory effect on the spontaneous activity of septohippocampal neurons.
However, benzodiazepines seem to be more active than antidepressants or 
neuroleptics.
Oxotremorine (i.v.)
had a potent excitatory effect on 
septohippocampal neurons.
Atropine (i.v.)
increased the septohippocampal 
neurons' firing rate in some cases.
These results are discussed in view of the 
possible implication of the involvement of septohippocampal neurons in the 
mediation of the effects of psychotropic drugs on the central nervous system 
and, more specifically, on the cholinergic systems.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(88)90194-7
PMID: 2908059 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Glucosamine on Platelet-Collagen Reaction 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1968 Mar;127(3):941-3. doi: 10.3181/00379727-127-32840.

Effect of glucosamine on platelet-collagen reaction.

Legrand Y
 Caen JP, Robert L.

DOI: 10.3181/00379727-127-32840
PMID: 5651155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of cortisone and ACTH on behaviour of beta-glucuronidase and beta-galactosidase in stomach mucosa of white rat. 1. Acta Histochem. 1968;30(2):380-5.

The effect of cortisone and ACTH on behaviour of beta-glucuronidase and 
beta-galactosidase in stomach mucosa of white rat.

Kozlowska K.

PMID: 4302063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of GABA and Some GABA Analogues on Respiratory Regulation in the Preterm Rabbit <jats:p>Preterm neonatal rabbits (gestational age 29 days) were given GABA (750 mg/kg) or the GABA-like drugs muscimol (2 mg/kg) and GHBA (375 mg/kg) intraperitoneally. Basal respiration and the ventilatory response to 10% CO&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt; were studied
 before and after drug administration, in a whole body plethysmograph during halothane anesthesia.
The three drugs tested all caused a decrease in minute volume.
The decrease in minute volume was mainly due to a decrease in tidal volume after GABA and muscimol, while GHBA reduced minute volume due to a decrease in respiratory frequency.
A decrease in respiratory frequency was also seen after muscimol administration.
Changes in the respiratory time intervals were seen after muscimol and GHBA both causing significant increases in expiratory and respiratory time.
‘Inspiratory drive’ and ‘respiratory timing mechanisms’ were evaluated by V&lt;sub&gt;τ&lt;/sub&gt;/T&lt;sub&gt;I&lt;/sub&gt; and T&lt;sub&gt;ι&lt;/sub&gt;/T&lt;sub&gt;TOT&lt;/sub&gt;, respectively.
GABA and muscimol reduced both V&lt;sub&gt;T&lt;/sub&gt;/T&lt;sub&gt;I&lt;/sub&gt; and Tι/T&lt;sub&gt;TOT&lt;/sub&gt; while GHBA only reduced T&lt;sub&gt;I&lt;/sub&gt;/T&lt;sub&gt;TOT&lt;/sub&gt; Addition of 10% CO&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt; to the inhalation gas caused an increase in tidal volume and minute volume during control conditions.
This response to CO&lt;sub&gt;2&lt;/sub&gt; was abolished by GABA and GHBA treatment.
Our findings demonstrate that GABA and GABA-like drugs cause respiratory depression in the preterm neonate.
Central mechanisms are most likely involved in this response.
These findings may be relevant to the irregular or apneic breathing sometimes seen in the preterm human infant.</jats:p>
Sarcolemmal Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase activity in congestive heart failure due to myocardial infarction <jats:p> Because the Na+ pump is considered to modulate the contractile force development by the cardiac muscle and depressed cardiac pump function is the hallmark of congestive heart failure
 we characterized the sarcolemmal Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase activity in failing rat hearts after myocardial infarction.
For this purpose, the left ventricular coronary artery was ligated, and hearts were examined 4, 8, and 16 wk later; sham-operated animals served as controls.
Hemodynamic assessment revealed the presence of abnormal cardiac function at 4, 8, and 16 wk.
Although accumulation of ascites in the abdominal cavity was present in experimental animals at 4 wk, other clinical signs of congestive heart failure in experimental rats including lung congestion and cardiac dilatation were evident 8 and 16 wk after induction of myocardial infarction.
The depression in Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase activity in purified sarcolemmal membrane from the uninfarcted experimental left ventricle at 8 wk was associated with depressed Vmax without any changes in the affinities for Mg-ATP, Na+, and K+ or the pH optimum for the enzyme.
The Kd values of both the high- and low-affinity binding sites for [3H]ouabain, which is believed to interact with Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase, were increased; however, no change in the density of either class of ouabain binding site was evident.
The depression of Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase activity in failing hearts at 16 wk of myocardial infarction was not different from that observed at 8 wk but the enzyme activity was not altered at 4 wk of coronary occlusion.
These data support the view that depression of Na(+)-K(+)-ATPase activity may serve as an adaptive mechanism during the development of congestive heart failure.
</jats:p>
Actions of some 3-methoxyphenylethylamine derivatives on cortical neurones. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1973 Sep;205(1):29-39.

Actions of some 3-methoxyphenylethylamine derivatives on cortical neurones.

Stone TW.

PMID: 4757846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Inhibitory effect of glycine and similar amino acids on spinal neurons]. 1. Helv Physiol Pharmacol Acta. 1968;26(2):CR 205-6.

[Inhibitory effect of glycine and similar amino acids on spinal neurons].

[Article in German]

Curtis DR
 Hösli L, Johnston GA.

PMID: 5697775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of fluoxetine
 tianeptine and olanzapine on unpredictable chronic mild stress-induced depression-like behavior in mice 1.
Life Sci.
2012 Dec 17;91(25-26):1252-62. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2012.09.023.
Epub 
2012 Oct 13.
Effects of fluoxetine, tianeptine and olanzapine on unpredictable chronic mild 
stress-induced depression-like behavior in mice.
Mutlu O(1), Gumuslu E, Ulak G, Celikyurt IK, Kokturk S, Kır HM, Akar F, Erden F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, Kocaeli University, Turkey.
oguzmutlu80@hotmail.com

AIMS: Tianeptine is an atypical antidepressant drug that has a different 
mechanism of action than other antidepressants.
Olanzapine is an atypical 
antipsychotic drug used for the treatment of schizophrenia.
The present study 
was undertaken to investigate effects of chronic administration of tianeptine or 
olanzapine on unpredictable chronic mild stress (UCMS)-induced depression-like 
behavior in mice compared to a widely used SSRI antidepressant, fluoxetine.
MAIN METHODS: Male inbred BALB/c mice were subjected to different kinds of 
stressors several times a day for 7weeks and were treated intraperitoneally with 
tianeptine (5mg/kg), olanzapine (2.5mg/kg), fluoxetine (15mg/kg) or vehicle for 
5weeks (n=7-8 per group).
KEY FINDINGS: All the drugs tested prevented stress-induced deficit in coat 
state during UCMS procedure, in grooming behavior in the splash test, decreased 
the attack frequency in the resident intruder test and decreased the immobility 
time in the tail suspension test.
In the open field test olanzapine had 
anxiolytic-like effects in both stressed and non-stressed mice.
Tianeptine, 
olanzapine and fluoxetine decreased the enhanced levels of plasma ACTH and IL-6.
Chronic treatment with tianeptine resulted in a significant increase in both 
total number and density of BrdU-labeled cells in stressed animals, while 
fluoxetine and olanzapine had a partial effect.
SIGNIFICANCE: The results of this study support the hypothesis that tianeptine 
can be as effective as fluoxetine for the treatment of depression in spite of 
the differences in the mechanism of action of these drugs.
Moreover, olanzapine 
could be used effectively in psychotic patients with depression.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2012.09.023
PMID: 23069580 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of a high-fat diet and bamboo extract supplement on anxiety- and depression-like neurobehaviours in mice <jats:p>High-fat diet is a major causative factor of overweight and obesity
 which are associated with an increased risk of neuropsychiatric diseases, such as anxiety and depression.
In the present study, we investigated the protective effects of bamboo extract (BEX) on anxiety- and depression-like neurobehaviours in mice treated with a high-fat diet.
Male mice with CD-1 genetic background were treated for 2 months with either a standard or a high-fat diet (10 or 45 % energy from fat, respectively), with or without the BEX supplement (11 g dry mass per 17 MJ).
The anxiety levels of mice were evaluated using open-field and hole-board tests, and depression was measured using the force-swimming test.
The anxiety responses of the animals were found significantly increased after the high-fat diet treatment, and this elevation was effectively abolished by the BEX supplement.
The high-fat diet seemed to have an anti-depressive effect in mice at the tested time point, but the effect of the BEX supplement on the depression level of the animals was not conclusive.
The high-fat diet significantly decreased total glutathione content in the blood while the BEX supplement increased glutathione oxidation.
In summary, the present study shows that decreased total glutathione concentration in the blood co-occurred with a high-fat treatment, high anxiety level and low depression level in mice, and when supplemented in a high-fat diet, BEX had an anxiolytic effect in mice.</jats:p>
Evidence for constitutive protein synthesis in hippocampal LTP stabilization 1. Neuroscience. 2013 Aug 29;246:301-11. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.05.011.
 Epub 2013 May 16.

Evidence for constitutive protein synthesis in hippocampal LTP stabilization.

Abbas AK(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology
 University of Gothenburg, PO Box 
433, SE-40530 Gothenburg, Sweden.
abdul-karim.abbas@neuro.gu.se

The notion that blockade of constitutive protein synthesis underlies the effect 
of protein synthesis inhibitors (PSIs) on long-term potentiation (LTP) 
stabilization was examined using the rat hippocampal CA3-CA1 synapse.
Using a 
biochemical assay we found protein synthesis rate largely recovered 1h after 
wash-out of cycloheximide (CHX).
Nonetheless, a 4-h CHX application followed by 
wash-out 1h prior to LTP resulted in a significant decrement of LTP 
stabilization.
Wash-out initiated just prior to LTP, thus extending protein 
synthesis inhibition well into the post-LTP period, resulted in no further 
effect on LTP.
However, short pre- and continuous post-tetanization application 
of PSIs failed to influence LTP persistence for up to 7 h. Addition of hydrogen 
peroxide (H₂O₂) 5-25 min following LTP induction resulted in parallel depression 
of potentiated and non-potentiated inputs, leaving LTP seemingly unaltered.
However, in the presence of cyxloheximide the H₂O₂ application resulted in a 
significant reduction of LTP.
IN CONCLUSION: LTP stabilization was impaired by pre-LTP application of protein 
synthesis inhibition but not by post-LTP application unless the slices were 
exposed to oxidative stress.
We submit that these results favor the notion that 
constitutive rather than triggered protein synthesis is important for LTP 
stabilization.
Copyright © 2013 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.05.011
PMID: 23685165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of actinomycin D
 mitomycin C, puromycin, and cycloheximide on desoxycorticosterone‐induced in vitro maturation in oocytes of the catfish, <i>Heteropneustes fossilis</i> (Bloch) <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Actinomycin D and mitomycin C, inhibitors of DNA‐dependent RNA synthesis, were ineffective in blocking desoxycorticosterone (DOC)‐induced in vitro maturation in oocytes of the catfish, <jats:italic>Heteropneustes fossilis</jats:italic> (Bloch).
This suggests that a concurrent mRNA synthesis is not obligatory for DOC‐induced maturation.
On the other hand, cycloheximide and puromycin, inhibitors of protein synthesis, effectively blocked DOC‐induced oocyte maturation; the former was effective at much lower concentrations than the latter.
Further, cycloheximide or puromycin completely blocked oocyte maturation when introduced to the culture medium simultaneously with, or within the first three hours of addition of DOC.
As the introduction of the inhibitors to the culture medium was delayed, a progressively larger number of oocytes completed the process of maturation.
These results indicate that DOC‐induced maturation in the catfish oocytes is contingent upon protein synthesis which takes place within the first three to four hours of DOC stimulation.</jats:p>
CGP 35348 and CGP 55845A block the baclofen-induced depression of dorsal root evoked potentials in lumbar motoneurons of the neonatal rat 1. Neurosci Lett. 1996 Aug 23;214(2-3):103-6. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(96)12904-9.

CGP 35348 and CGP 55845A block the baclofen-induced depression of dorsal root 
evoked potentials in lumbar motoneurons of the neonatal rat.

Vinay L(1)
 Clarac F.

Author information:
(1)CNRS, UPR Neurobiologie et Mouvements, Marseille, France.
vinay@Inf.cnrs-mrs.fr

In vitro brainstem-spinal cord preparations isolated from neonatal (0-5 days 
old) rats were used to investigate the GABAB receptor-mediated modulation of the 
dorsal root evoked potentials in lumbar motoneurons recorded intracellularly.
The GABAB receptor agonist, baclofen, at low concentrations (1-10 microM), 
caused a reduction of the amplitude of the monosynaptic excitatory postsynaptic 
potential (EPSP), in a concentration-dependent manner.
The depression of EPSPs 
was likely exerted at a presynaptic level since it occurred without any 
significant change of the passive membrane properties of the motoneurons.
The 
two GABAB receptor antagonists, CGP 35348 and CGP 55845A blocked the effects of 
baclofen.
These two compounds may be useful tools to study the evolution of 
GABAB receptor-mediated presynaptic inhibition during ontogenesis.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(96)12904-9
PMID: 8878094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant-like effect of coadministration of sulpiride and fluvoxamine in mice 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2005 Sep 27;520(1-3):86-90. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2005.08.011.

Antidepressant-like effect of coadministration of sulpiride and fluvoxamine in 
mice.

Ago Y(1)
 Harasawa T, Itoh S, Nakamura S, Baba A, Matsuda T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Medicinal Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical 
Sciences, Osaka University, Osaka, Japan.
We have recently reported that coadministration of sulpiride, an antipsychotic 
drug, and fluvoxamine, a selective serotonin (5-HT) reuptake inhibitor, 
selectively increases in vivo dopamine release in the prefrontal cortex.
This 
study examined the effects of coadministration of these drugs on duration of 
immobility in the tail suspension test using mice.
Neither sulpiride (3 or 10 
mg/kg) nor fluvoxamine (10 or 20 mg/kg) alone affected immobility time, whereas 
coadministration significantly reduced immobility time.
WAY 100635, a 5-HT(1A) 
receptor antagonist, did not affect the effects of sulpiride and fluvoxamine 
coadministration, but reduced immobility time in combination with fluvoxamine 
(20 mg/kg).
A high dose of fluvoxamine alone (60 mg/kg) also reduced immobility 
time.
These results suggest that the antidepressant-like effects of fluvoxamine 
in combination with sulpiride or WAY 100635 in the tail suspension test are 
mediated by the activation of dopamine or 5-HT systems, respectively.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2005.08.011
PMID: 16140294 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Endothelium-dependent relaxation and hyperpolarization in aorta from control and renal hypertensive rats. <jats:p>Endothelium-dependent relaxations are depressed in hypertension. In this study we investigated the possible involvement of endothelium-dependent smooth muscle hyperpolarization in this phenomenon. In isolated aortic segments from control rats
 acetylcholine (10(-8)-10(-5) M) elicits relaxations after precontraction with norepinephrine (10(-7) M), and acetylcholine or carbachol (10(-5) M) induce smooth muscle hyperpolarization (10.6 +/- 0.9 mV).
Both effects disappear after removal of the endothelium and are depressed by tetraethylammonium (3 x 10(-3) M), a rather nonspecific blocker of K+ channels, but not by glibenclamide (10(-5) M), a potent blocker of the ATP-regulated K+ channels, which has a marked effect on the relaxation induced by BRL 38227.
The relaxation effect of acetylcholine is impaired in norepinephrine-contracted preparations from hypertensive rats but is not further depressed by tetraethylammonium.
In aorta from hypertensive rats, hyperpolarization induced by carbachol was significantly reduced to a mean of only 21.8% of the values obtained in preparations from normotensive rats.
From the relaxation-hyperpolarization relation obtained with BRL 38227 (opening K+ channels), it is derived that the endothelium-dependent hyperpolarization (approximately 10 mV) contributes for at least 20-30% of the maximal relaxation effect of acetylcholine on rat aorta.
It is concluded that the diminished endothelium-dependent hyperpolarization may contribute to the depression of the endothelium-dependent relaxation in hypertension.</jats:p>
The neuromuscular blocking action of suxamethonium in the anaesthetised rat. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1969 Oct;181(2):283-6.

The neuromuscular blocking action of suxamethonium in the anaesthetised rat.

Ireson JD
 Ford R, Loveday C.

PMID: 5403606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Coronary Vasodilating Effect of Some Chromanone Derivatives 1. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 1972 Jan;20(1):82-7. doi: 10.1248/cpb.20.82.

Coronary vasodilating effect of some chromanone derivatives.

Nagao T
 Nishio S, Kato H, Takagi K.

DOI: 10.1248/cpb.20.82
PMID: 4622566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Bioelectrical activity of the neuromuscular and sympathetic systems exposed to a constant magnetic field]. 1. Kosm Biol Aviakosm Med. 1979 Nov-Dec;13(6):58-61.

[Bioelectrical activity of the neuromuscular and sympathetic systems exposed to 
a constant magnetic field].

[Article in Russian]

Klimovskaia LD
 Krotova SB.
The experiments on an isolated frog neuromuscular preparation gave evidence that 
an exposure to stable magnetic fields of 1000-4000 Oe did not influence the time 
parameters, amplitude and pattern of the action potentials of the gastrocnemius 
muscle induced by ischiatic nerve stimulation with single impulses.
Similar 
results were obtained from an analysis of electric responses of the upper 
cervical sympathetic mode to the stimulation of preganglionar fibers in in situ 
experiments on urethane anesthesized rabbits subjected to a total exposure of a 
stable magnetic field (500-3000 Oe).
In addition, an exposure to a stable 
magnetic field of 4000 Oe brought about a decrease of the level of depression of 
the action potential of muscles after conditioning tetanus.
PMID: 502428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hippocampal long-term depression mediates acute stress-induced spatial memory retrieval impairment <jats:p>
            Acute stress impairs memory retrieval and facilitates the induction of long-term depression (LTD) in the hippocampal CA1 region of the adult rodent brain. However
 whether such alterations in synaptic plasticity cause the behavioral effects of stress is not known.
Here, we report that two selective inhibitors of the induction or expression of stress-enabled,
            <jats:italic>N</jats:italic>
            -methyl-
            <jats:sc>d</jats:sc>
            -aspartate receptor-dependent hippocampal LTD also block spatial memory retrieval impairments caused by acute stress.
Additionally, we demonstrate that facilitating the induction of hippocampal LTD
            <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>
            by blockade of glutamate transport mimics the behavioral effects of acute stress by impairing spatial memory retrieval.
Thus, the present study demonstrates that hippocampal LTD is both necessary and sufficient to cause acute stress-induced impairment of spatial memory retrieval and provides a new perspective from which to consider the nature of cognitive deficits in disorders whose symptoms are aggravated by stress.
</jats:p>
Vinblastine: Influence on nerve conduction and synaptic transmission <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Vinblastine injected into the eyes of pigeons had a detrimental effect on the amplitude of the postsynaptic evoked potential in the optic tectum; impulse conduction of the optic nerve was not influenced. The depression of the postsynaptic evoked potential was dependent on the dosage. Only 20 and 100 μg vinblastine had an influence; no influence was observed with 10 μg vinblastine. The reversible depression was seen from the third day after injection to between the 21st and the 28th day after injection
 and in that period it remained constant.
The latency of the response was not influenced by vinblastine.</jats:p>
Effects of Long-Term Sertraline Treatment and Depression on Coronary Artery Atherosclerosis in Premenopausal Female Primates 1. Psychosom Med. 2015 Apr;77(3):267-78. doi: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000163.

Effects of long-term sertraline treatment and depression on coronary artery 
atherosclerosis in premenopausal female primates.

Shively CA(1)
 Register TC, Appt SE, Clarkson TB.
Author information:
(1)From the Department of Pathology/Comparative Medicine, Wake Forest School of 
Medicine, Winston-Salem, North Carolina.
OBJECTIVES: Major depressive disorder and coronary heart disease often co-occur 
in the same individuals.
Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are 
widely prescribed for depression and other disorders, but their effects on 
coronary heart disease risk remain unclear.
We determined the effects of an SSRI 
on coronary artery atherosclerosis (CAA) in an established nonhuman primate 
model used to clarify the association between depression and CAA.
METHODS: Forty-two adult female cynomolgus macaques consuming a Western diet 
were characterized during an 18-month pretreatment phase and assigned to SSRI 
(sertraline hydrochloride 20 mg/kg, per os, once a day) or placebo balanced on 
pretreatment depression, body weight (BW), and iliac artery atherosclerosis 
extent measured via biopsy.
After 18 months, CAA extent was measured using 
histomorphometry.
RESULTS: Before and during treatment, depressed monkeys had lower BW, body mass 
index, and plasma high-density lipoprotein cholesterol, and higher heart rates 
during the pretreatment (p < .01) but not the treatment phase (p = .17).
There 
were no pretreatment differences between the sertraline and placebo groups.
Sertraline reduced anxious behavior but had no effect on BW, body mass index, 
heart rate, plasma lipids, or depression.
CAA, analyzed by a 2 (depressed, 
nondepressed) × 2 (placebo, sertraline) × 3 (coronary arteries) analysis of 
covariance adjusted for pretreatment iliac atherosclerosis, was greater in 
depressed than in nondepressed monkeys (p < .036), and in sertraline than in 
placebo-treated monkeys (p = .040).
The observed CAA extent in depressed monkeys 
treated with sertraline was 4.9 times higher than that in untreated depressed 
monkeys, and 6.5 times higher than that in nondepressed monkeys, on average.
CONCLUSIONS: Depressed animals developed more CAA, and long-term treatment with 
sertraline resulted in more extensive CAA.
DOI: 10.1097/PSY.0000000000000163
PMCID: PMC4397139
PMID: 25829239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Regulation of Kainate Receptors by cAMP-Dependent Protein Kinase and Phosphatases <jats:p>In the mammalian central nervous system
 receptors for excitatory amino acid neurotransmitters such as the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA)-kainate receptor mediate a large fraction of excitatory transmission.
Currents induced by activation of the AMPA-kainate receptor were potentiated by agents that specifically stimulate adenosine 3′,5′-monophosphate (cAMP)-dependent protein kinase A (PKA) activity or were supported by intracellular application of the catalytic subunit of PKA by itself or in combination with cAMP.
Furthermore, depression of these currents by a competitive inhibitor of PKA indicates that AMPA-kainate receptors are regulated by endogenous PKA.
Endogenous protein phosphatases also regulate these receptors because an inhibitor of cellular phosphatases enhanced kainate currents.
Modulation of PKA and phosphatases may regulate the function of these receptors and thus contribute to synaptic plasticity in hippocampal neurons.</jats:p>
Commentary on the Hypermetabolic State and the Role of Oxygen in Alcohol-Induced Liver Injury 1. Recent Dev Alcohol. 1984;2:135-41. doi: 10.1007/978-1-4684-4661-6_8.

Commentary on the hypermetabolic state and the role of oxygen in alcohol-induced 
liver injury.

Mezey E.

Centrilobular hypoxia has been postulated as a mechanism for the development of 
hepatocellular necrosis and fibrosis in alcoholic liver disease. Chronic ethanol 
ingestion in rodents results in increased hepatic oxygen consumption and in a 
steeper fall in oxygen tension between the periportal and the pericentral area 
of the lobule
 rendering the pericentral area susceptible to hypoxia.
Hepatocellular necrosis occurs when ethanol-fed animals are exposed to low 
atmospheric oxygen.
In man, the existence of a hypermetabolic state is more 
tenuous, but suggested by an increased rate of ethanol elimination after chronic 
ethanol consumption that has been linked to increased oxygen consumption in 
animals.
Also, decreases in hepatic blood flow and hepatic vein oxygen tension 
were found in alcoholics with histological evidence of liver-cell necrosis as 
compared to those without necrosis.
It is postulated that in man, reduction in 
the availability of oxygen to the liver may be caused by miscellaneous 
conditions such as anemia, respiratory depression or infection, 
cigarette-smoking, or reduction of hepatic blood flow, but the contribution of 
one or more of these factors remains to be proven.
Trials of the effect of 
propylthiouracil (PTU) on alcoholic hepatitis are based on the effect of this 
drug in decreasing the ethanol-induced hypermetabolic state and in preventing 
hepatocellular necrosis in animals exposed to low atmospheric oxygen.
A 
tentative conclusion of the two small trials that have been completed is that 
PTU may be beneficial in moderately ill patients with a low mortality, but not 
useful in severely ill patients with a high mortality.
DOI: 10.1007/978-1-4684-4661-6_8
PMID: 6374779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Photoaugmentation in the Hairless Mouse: A Study Using Ornithine Decarboxylase Activity and Alteration of DNA Synthesis as Markers of Epidermal Response 1. J Invest Dermatol. 1981 Nov;77(5):393-6. doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12494573.

Photoaugmentation in the hairless mouse: a study using ornithine decarboxylase 
activity and alteration of DNA synthesis as markers of epidermal response.

Gange RW
 Mendelson IR.
Photoaugmentation is the potentiation of UVB-induced cutaneous erythema by UV 
irradiation.
We have examined other cutaneous responses to UVB irradiation-the 4 
hr depression of DNA synthesis, the 48 hr stimulation of DNA synthesis, and the 
induction of ornithine decarboxylase (ODC), to determine whether these were also 
susceptible to augmentation by UVA, which does not cause these responses when 
administered alone.
No photoaugmentation of DNA synthesis, stimulation or ODC 
induction occurred.
The early depression of DNA synthesis was slightly augmented 
for this did not consistently reach significance.
DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12494573
PMID: 7288205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant effect of Stillen™ 1. Arch Pharm Res. 2015 Jun;38(6):1223-31. doi: 10.1007/s12272-014-0472-8. Epub 
2014 Aug 28.

Antidepressant effect of Stillen.

Jeong HJ(1)
 Kim JH, Kim NR, Yoou MS, Nam SY, Kim KY, Choi Y, Jang JB, Kang IC, 
Baek NI, Kim HM.
Author information:
(1)Biochip Research Center and Inflammatory Disease Research Center, Hoseo 
University, Asan, 336-795, Chungnam, Republic of Korea.
Stillen has been used to treat patients with gastric mucosal ulcers and has an 
anti-inflammatory effect.
It is well-known that neuro-inflammatory reactions are 
related to depression.
Here we evaluated the antidepressant-like effect of 
Stillen on mice subjected to the forced swimming test (FST).
Stillen and 
eupatilin (a major component of Stillen) significantly decreased immobility 
times compared with the FST control group.
In the Stillen-administered group, 
increased levels of 5-hydroxytryptamine (serotonin) and brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor protein were observed in the hippocampus.
Nissl bodies also 
increased in the hippocampus neuronal cytoplasm of the Stillen-administered 
group.
Stillen decreased levels of interleukin (IL)-1β, IL-6, and tumor necrosis 
factor-α (at the mRNA and protein levels) in the hippocampus and serum, compared 
with the control group.
In addition, the mRNA expression of estrogen receptor-β 
increased after Stillen administration in the hippocampus.
These findings 
suggest that Stillen should be viewed as a candidate antidepressant.
DOI: 10.1007/s12272-014-0472-8
PMID: 25163682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic fluoxetine inhibits sexual behavior in the male rat: reversal with oxytocin 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1999 Jun;144(4):355-62. doi: 10.1007/s002130051018.

Chronic fluoxetine inhibits sexual behavior in the male rat: reversal with 
oxytocin.

Cantor JM(1)
 Binik YM, Pfaus JG.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
RATIONALE: Selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors, used widely in the treatment 
of depression, progressively inhibit sexual orgasm in many patients and induce a 
transient inhibition of sexual desire.
OBJECTIVES: We attempted to model the effects of these drugs in sexually 
experienced male rats during tests of copulation in bilevel chambers.
These 
chambers allow the study of both appetitive and consummatory sexual responses of 
male rats.
METHODS: Males were treated daily with fluoxetine hydrochloride (0, 1, 5, or 10 
mg/kg) and tested for sexual behavior with receptive females at 4-day intervals.
Rats were treated with oxytocin (200 ng/kg) or saline after ejaculations had 
decreased.
RESULTS: Fluoxetine decreased ejaculatory responses of male rats in a dose- and 
time-dependent fashion, but left the copulatory efficiency of the males intact.
In contrast, conditioned level changing, a measure of appetitive sexual 
excitement, was inhibited following acute and chronic treatment with 10 mg/kg, 
although tolerance may have developed to the effect of 5 mg/kg.
Subsequent 
administration of oxytocin restored the ejaculatory response but not the measure 
of sexual excitement to baseline levels.
CONCLUSIONS: The reversal by oxytocin of the fluoxetine-induced deficit in 
ejaculations is consistent with the hypothesis that serotonin suppresses 
ejaculatory mechanisms by interrupting the action of oxytocin, which normally 
accompanies sexual behavior.
Co-administration of oxytocin may help to alleviate 
the predominant sexual side effect of serotonin reuptake blockers.
DOI: 10.1007/s002130051018
PMID: 10435408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Shaping brain development: Mouse communal nesting blunts adult neuroendocrine and behavioral response to social stress and modifies chronic antidepressant treatment outcome 1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2010 Jun;35(5):743-51. doi: 
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.10.016. Epub 2009 Nov 27.

Shaping brain development: mouse communal nesting blunts adult neuroendocrine 
and behavioral response to social stress and modifies chronic antidepressant 
treatment outcome.

Branchi I(1)
 D'Andrea I, Cirulli F, Lipp HP, Alleva E.

Author information:
(1)Section of Behavioural Neurosciences, Department of Cell Biology and 
Neurosciences, Istituto Superiore di Sanità, 00161 Rome, Italy.
branchi@iss.it

Early experiences shape brain function and behavior and, consequently, 
vulnerability to psychopathology at adulthood.
Here we exploited the mouse 
communal nest (CN) paradigm in order to investigate the effect of the early 
social environment on the emergence of endophenotypes of depression and on 
antidepressant efficacy at adulthood.
CN, which consists in a single nest where 
three mothers keep their pups together and share care-giving behavior until 
weaning, is characterized by high levels of maternal behavior and peer 
interactions, thus representing an highly stimulating environment.
Our results 
show that, when compared to mice reared in standard laboratory conditions (SN), 
adult CN mice exhibited greater sucrose preference on the first days of the 
test, displayed reduced anhedonia during social stress and had lower 
corticosterone levels after acute and prolonged social stress.
Furthermore, in 
line with previous work, CN displayed longer immobility than SN mice in the 
forced swim test.
Here we show that such behavioral response is differently 
affected by antidepressants according to early experiences.
A 3-week fluoxetine 
treatment affected only SN mice, leading to an increase of immobility duration 
up to the levels showed by CN mice, while acute fluoxetine administration 
decreased immobility duration in both groups.
These results show that being 
reared in a CN profoundly changes developmental trajectories, reducing the adult 
display of endophenotypes of depression and modifying response to 
antidepressants.
The present findings suggest that early experiences represent 
one of those factors to be taken into account to identify the appropriate 
individual pharmacological strategy to treat depression in patients.
Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2009.10.016
PMID: 19945226 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Paired‐pulse depression of monosynaptic GABA‐mediated inhibitory postsynaptic responses in rat hippocampus. <jats:p>1. Intracellular recording techniques were used to characterize monosynaptic inhibitory postsynaptic potentials (IPSPs) and currents (IPSCs) in rat hippocampal slices and to study the mechanism of paired‐pulse depression of these synaptic responses. This was achieved by stimulation in stratum radiatum close (less than 0.5 mm) to an intracellularly recorded CA1 neurone after pharmacological blockade of all excitatory synaptic transmission. 2. Under these conditions
 low‐frequency stimulation (0.033 Hz) evoked a pure biphasic IPSP, which had a short and constant latency to onset.
This IPSP was blocked by tetrodotoxin (1 microM) suggesting that it resulted from the electrical stimulation of the axons and/or cell bodies of a monosynaptic inhibitory pathway.
3.
Picrotoxin (100 microM) abolished the early component of the biphasic IPSP/C.
It left an intact, pure late IPSP/C (IPSP/CB) which had a latency to onset of 29 +/‐ 2 ms, latency to peak of 139 +/‐ 4 ms, a duration of 723 +/‐ 135 (range 390‐1730) ms and a reversal potential of ‐93 +/‐ 2 mV.
The duration was highly dependent on the stimulus intensity whereas the latency to onset was largely independent of the stimulus intensity.
The IPSP/CB was reduced or abolished by 1 mM‐phaclofen.
4.
Phaclofen (1 mM) and 2‐hydroxy‐saclofen (0.1‐1.0 mM) reversibly depressed (60‐100%) the late component of the biphasic IPSP/C and, where maximally effective, left a pure, early IPSP/C (IPSP/CA).
The IPSP/CA had a latency to onset of 3 ms or less, a latency to peak of 17 +/‐ 1 ms, a duration of 225 +/‐ 3 ms and a reversal potential of ‐75 +/‐ 2 mV.
5.
Two shocks of identical strength were applied in close succession to characterize, and to study the mechanisms underlying, frequency‐dependent depression of inhibitory synaptic responses.
Paired‐pulse depression was seen for both phases of the biphasic IPSP/C and of the pure IPSP/CB, recorded in the presence of picrotoxin.
Paired‐pulse depression was not accompanied by changes in the reversal potential of either component, indicating that it was caused by a reduction in the two synaptic conductances.
Paired‐pulse depression was greater when high stimulus intensities were employed.
6.
Paired stimuli were applied at separation intervals of between 5 ms and 10 s to determine the temporal profile of frequency‐dependent depression.
Paired‐pulse depression of both IPSCA and IPSCB was most pronounced at an interstimulus interval of 100‐125 ms and ceased to occur at intervals greater than 5 10s.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)</jats:p>
Impact of Exposure to Bacteria on Metabolism in the Penaeid Shrimp<i>Litopenaeus vannamei</i> 1. Biol Bull. 2006 Aug;211(1):44-9. doi: 10.2307/4134576.

Impact of exposure to bacteria on metabolism in the penaeid shrimp Litopenaeus 
vannamei.

Scholnick DA(1)
 Burnett KG, Burnett LE.
Author information:
(1)Marine Science, Eckerd College, St. Petersburg, Florida 33711, USA.
David.Scholnick@pacificu.edu

We hypothesized that aggregation of bacteria and hemocytes at the gill, which 
occurs as part of the shrimp's antibacterial immune defenses, would impair 
normal respiratory function and thereby disrupt aerobic metabolism.
Changes in 
oxygen uptake and lactate accumulation were determined in Litopenaeus vannamei, 
the Pacific white shrimp, following injection with either saline (control) or a 
strain of the gram-negative bacterium Vibrio campbellii that is pathogenic in 
crustaceans.
The rate of oxygen uptake was determined during the first 4 h after 
injection and after 24 h. Injection of bacteria decreased oxygen uptake by 27% 
(from 11.0 to 8.2 micromol g-1 h-1) after 4 h, while saline-injected shrimp 
showed no change.
Decreased oxygen uptake persisted 24 h after Vibrio injection.
In well-aerated water, resting whole-animal lactic acid levels increased in 
shrimp injected with bacteria (mean=2.59 micromol lactate g-1+/-0.39 SEM, n=8) 
compared to saline-injected control shrimp, but this difference did not persist 
at 24 h. Exposure to hypercapnic hypoxia (PCO2=1.8 kPa, PO2=6.7 kPa) also 
resulted in significant whole-body lactic acid differences (mean=3.99 and 1.8 
micromol g-1 tissue in Vibrio and saline-injected shrimp, respectively).
Our 
results support the hypothesis that the crustacean immune response against 
invading bacteria impairs normal metabolic function, resulting in depression of 
oxygen uptake and slightly increased anaerobic metabolism.
DOI: 10.2307/4134576
PMID: 16946240 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The neuromuscular blocking properties of 4
4'(2-(4-methyl-piperidyl)-1-hydroxyethyl) biphenyl.
1.
Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther.
1972 Aug;198(2):305-11.
The neuromuscular blocking properties of 
4,4'(2-(4-methyl-piperidyl)-1-hydroxyethyl) biphenyl.
Onur R, Kayaalp SO.
PMID: 5054738 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Limited Proteolysis of the Bovine Pancreatic Secretory Trypsin Inhibitor at Acid pH 1. J Biol Chem. 1968 Oct 25;243(20):5457-64.

Limited proteolysis of the bovine pancreatic secretory trypsin inhibitor at acid 
pH.

Rigbi M
 Greene LJ.
PMID: 5750336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Prolactin receptors in 7
12-dimethylbenz(a) anthracene-induced mammary tumors following endocrine ablation.
1.
Cancer Res.
1976 Nov;36(11 Pt 1):3941-3.
Prolactin receptors in 7,12-dimethylbenz(a) anthracene-induced mammary tumors 
following endocrine ablation.
Costlow ME, Buschow RA, McGuire WL.
We have determined the effect of ovariectomy and hypophysectomy on prolactin 
receptors in 7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene-induced mammary tumors.
Growing 
tumors from intact rats show a wide range in the number of prolactin receptors.
Ovariectomy causes a slight (approximately 30%) decrease in receptors regardless 
of whether tumors regress or continue to grow, while the affinity of the 
receptor for prolactin remains unchanged.
Hypophysectomy, which causes a prompt 
10-fold decrease in prolactin receptors in rat liver, causes only a slight 
reduction in prolactin receptors in tumors from these same animals.
We conclude 
that autonomous and ovariectomy responsive 
7,12-dimethylbenz(a)anthracene-induced mammary tumors cannot be distinguished on 
the basis of prolactin receptor sites and that endocrine regulation of prolactin 
receptors is distinctly different in normal liver and neoplastic mammary tissue.
PMID: 184919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pharmacological evaluation of novel 5-HT <sub>3</sub> receptor antagonist
 QCM-13 (N-cyclohexyl-3-methoxyquinoxalin-2-carboxamide) as anti-anxiety agent in behavioral test battery 1.
J Pharm Bioallied Sci.
2015 Apr-Jun;7(2):103-8. doi: 10.4103/0975-7406.154429.
Pharmacological evaluation of novel 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, QCM-13 
(N-cyclohexyl-3-methoxyquinoxalin-2-carboxamide) as anti-anxiety agent in 
behavioral test battery.
Gupta D(1), Radhakrishnan M(1), Thangaraj D(1), Kurhe Y(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of Technology and Science, Pilani, 
Rajasthan, India.
OBJECTIVE: In the last few decades, serotonin type-3 (5-HT3) receptor 
antagonists have been identified as potential targets for anxiety disorders.
In 
preclinical studies, 5-HT3 antagonists have shown promising antianxiety effects.
In this study, a novel 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, 
QCM-13(N-cyclohexyl-3-methoxyquinoxalin-2-carboxamide) was evaluated for 
anxiolytic-like activity in rodent behavioral test battery.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Mice were given QCM-13 (2 and 4 mg/kg, intraperitoneally 
[i.p.])
or diazepam (2 mg/kg, i.p.)
or vehicle and after 30 min, mice were 
subjected to four validated behavioral test batteries viz.
elevated plus maze, 
hole board, light-dark and open field tests.
Interaction study of QCM-13 with 
m-chlorophenyl piperazine (mCPP) (mCPP, a 5-HT2A/2C receptor agonist, 1 mg/kg, 
i.p.)
and buspirone (BUS, a partial 5-HT1A agonist, 10 mg/kg, i.p.)
were 
performed to assess the pharmacological mechanism of the drug.
RESULTS: QCM-13 expressed potential anxiolytic effect with significant (P < 
0.05) increase in behavioral parameters measured in aforementioned preliminary 
models.
Besides, QCM-13 was unable to reverse the anxiogenic effect of mCPP, but 
potentiated anxiolytic affect of BUS.
CONCLUSION: The results suggest that QCM-13 can be a potential therapeutic 
candidate for the management of anxiety-like disorders and combination doses of 
novel 5-HT3 receptor antagonist with standard anxiolytics may improve 
therapeutic efficacy.
DOI: 10.4103/0975-7406.154429
PMCID: PMC4399007
PMID: 25883513

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.
The inhibition of succinate oxidation in isolated mitochondria by uncouplers 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1968 Jan 15;153(1):306-8. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2728(68)90177-1.

The inhibition of succinate oxidation in isolated mitochondria by uncouplers.

Papa S
 Lofrumento NE, Paradies G, Quagliariello E.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2728(68)90177-1
PMID: 4170446 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[On the liver condition in animals under the effect of bromic ether]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1969 Mar-Apr;32(2):165-7.

[On the liver condition in animals under the effect of bromic ether].

[Article in Russian]

Karimullina NK
 Gizatullina AA.
PMID: 5772141 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effects of aromatase inhibitor on sexual differentiation of SDN-POA in rats]. 1. Nihon Sanka Fujinka Gakkai Zasshi. 1994 Mar;46(3):227-34.

[Effects of aromatase inhibitor on sexual differentiation of SDN-POA in rats].

[Article in Japanese]

Ohe E(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
 Teikyo University, School of 
Medicine, Tokyo.
The sexually dimorphic nucleus of the preoptic area (SDN-POA) of male rats is 
larger than that of females, the difference being caused by the perinatal effect 
of estrogen converted from androgen.
To investigate the role of estrogen 
formation in the SDN-POA during the critical period of this sexual 
differentiation, CGS16949A (0.5 mg/kg, sc) was injected into the mothers in the 
late gestational age(F) or into neonates for 14 days from birth(N).
Animals were 
sacrificed on the 20th.
day of gestation and 7 days after birth, and fetal and 
neonatal brain aromatase activities (AA) as well as serum levels of 
testosterone(T) and corticosterone(B) were measured.
On the 30th day after 
birth, the offspring of treated mothers and neonatally treated rats were 
sacrificed and the cross-sectional areas of the SDN-POA were evaluated by image 
processor NEXUS 6800.
In group F, CGS16949A markedly suppressed brain AA in 
vitro (fetal hypothalamus: IC50 1.4nM) and in vivo in both the hypothalamus and 
amygdala.
However, the levels of T and B did not show any significant change in 
group F. The same depression of AA was also observed in group N on the 7th day 
after birth.
In CGS-treated males in groups F and N, the SDN-POA area markedly 
decreased to that of control females.
The area in males in group F was not 
significantly different from that in females.
These results suggest that 
estrogen converted from androgen plays a dominant role in the development of 
sexual dimorphism of the SDN-POA, and that the brain AA in the pre- and 
postnatal period is important in this process.
PMID: 8133132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Preparation of 2
2-Diethyl 3-(3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoyloxy)propyl Carbamate 1.
J Pharm Sci.
1968 Apr;57(4):707. doi: 10.1002/jps.2600570440.
Preparation of 2,2-Diethyl-3-(3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoyloxy)propyl carbamate.
Sam J.

DOI: 10.1002/jps.2600570440
PMID: 5652170 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ion transport inhibition in the medullary thick ascending limb of Henle's loop by cytochrome P450-arachidonic acid metabolites. 1. Adv Prostaglandin Thromboxane Leukot Res. 1991;21A:209-12.

Ion transport inhibition in the medullary thick ascending limb of Henle's loop 
by cytochrome P450-arachidonic acid metabolites.

Escalante B(1)
 Erlij D, Falck JR, McGiff JC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, New York Medical College, Valhalla 10595.
PMID: 1847767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Design
 synthesis, and pharmacological evaluation of azetedine and pyrrolidine derivatives as dual norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors and 5-HT1A partial agonists 1.
Bioorg Med Chem Lett.
2011 Jan 15;21(2):865-8. doi:
10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.11.066.
Epub 2010 Nov 21.
Design, synthesis, and pharmacological evaluation of azetedine and pyrrolidine 
derivatives as dual norepinephrine reuptake inhibitors and 5-HT(1A) partial 
agonists.
Pettersson M(1), Campbell BM, Dounay AB, Gray DL, Xie L, O'Donnell CJ, Stratman 
NC, Zoski K, Drummond E, Bora G, Probert A, Whisman T.

Author information:
(1)Pfizer Global Research and Development, Eastern Point Road, Groton, CT 06340, 
United States.
martin.pettersson@pfizer.com

Compounds with combined norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (NRI) and serotonin 1A 
(5-HT(1A)) partial agonist pharmacology may offer a new therapeutic approach for 
treating symptoms of neuropsychiatric disorders including ADHD, depression, and 
anxiety.
Herein we describe the design and optimization of novel chemical matter 
that exhibits favorable dual NRI and 5-HT(1A) partial agonist activity.
Lead 
compounds in this series were found to be devoid of activity at the dopamine 
transporter and were shown to be brain penetrant with high receptor occupancy.
Copyright Â© 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2010.11.066
PMID: 21185183 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Sleep Deprivation on Serotonergic Neuronal Activity in the Dorsal Raphe Nucleus of the Freely Moving Cat 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 1997 Aug;17(2):72-81. doi: 
10.1016/S0893-133X(97)00025-0.

Effects of sleep deprivation on serotonergic neuronal activity in the dorsal 
raphe nucleus of the freely moving cat.

Gardner JP(1)
 Fornal CA, Jacobs BL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Princeton University, NJ 08544, USA.
Total sleep deprivation (TSD) for one or more nights produces a rapid 
antidepressant response in humans.
Since most pharmacological treatments for 
depression increase brain serotonin neurotransmission, the purpose of the 
present study was to determine whether TSD increases the activity of 
serotonergic neurons in the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) in cats.
Cats were 
prevented from sleeping by the experimenter, who monitored the behavioral state 
of each animal on a polygraph.
Firing rates during quiet waking (QW) and active 
waking (AW) were obtained throughout a 24-h sleep deprivation period and 
subsequent 6-h recovery period.
During the experiments, unit activity was also 
recorded during exposure to loud white noise, which elicited strong behavioral 
arousal.
The inhibitory response of serotonergic DRN neurons to systemic 
administration of the selective 5-HT1A agonist 
8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino)tetralin (8-OH-DPAT) was determined before and 
after TSD to assess possible changes in 5-HT1A autoreceptor sensitivity.
TSD 
increased mean firing rates by as much as 18% during both AW and white noise 
exposure.
Maximal effects were observed after 15 h of TSD for AW, and after 18 h 
for white noise.
QW firing rates also tended to be elevated throughout TSD.
Firing rates for all conditions during the recovery period were not 
significantly different from baseline.
The neuronal inhibition produced by 
8-OH-DPAT was significantly diminished after TSD.
Overall, these results 
indicate that TSD increases the firing rate of serotonergic DRN neurons during 
AW and arousal.
This effect may be attributable to a decrease in the sensitivity 
of 5-HT1A autoreceptors.
These findings are consistent with the hypothesis that 
TSD exerts its antidepressant action, at least in part, through an activation of 
brain serotonergic neurons.
DOI: 10.1016/S0893-133X(97)00025-0
PMID: 9252982 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
THE TRANSITION TO SOCIAL INBRED MATING SYSTEMS IN SPIDERS: ROLE OF INBREEDING TOLERANCE IN A SUBSOCIAL PREDECESSOR 1. Evolution. 2005 Jan;59(1):160-74.

The transition to social inbred mating systems in spiders: role of inbreeding 
tolerance in a subsocial predecessor.

Bilde T(1)
 Lubin Y, Smith D, Schneider JM, Maklakov AA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Ecology and Genetics, University of Aarhus, Aarhus, Denmark.
trine.bilde@biology.au.dk

The social spiders are unusual among cooperatively breeding animals in being 
highly inbred.
In contrast, most other social organisms are outbred owing to 
inbreeding avoidance mechanisms.
The social spiders appear to originate from 
solitary subsocial ancestors, implying a transition from outbreeding to 
inbreeding mating systems.
Such a transition may be constrained by inbreeding 
avoidance tactics or fitness loss due to inbreeding depression.
We examined 
whether the mating system of a subsocial spider, in a genus with three social 
congeners, is likely to facilitate or hinder the transition to inbreeding social 
systems.
Populations of subsocial Stegodyphus lineatus are substructured and 
spiders occur in patches, which may consist of kin groups.
We investigated 
whether male mating dispersal prevents matings within kin groups in natural 
populations.
Approximately half of the marked males that were recovered made 
short moves (< 5m) and mated within their natal patch.
This potential for 
inbreeding was counterbalanced by a relatively high proportion of immigrant 
males.
In mating experiments, we tested whether inbreeding actually results in 
lower offspring fitness.
Two levels of inbreeding were tested: full sibling 
versus non-sib matings and matings of individuals within and between naturally 
occurring patches of spiders.
Neither full siblings nor patch mates were 
discriminated against as mates.
Sibling matings had no effect on direct fitness 
traits such as fecundity, hatching success, time to hatching and survival of the 
offspring, but negatively affected offspring growth rates and adult body size of 
both males and females.
Neither direct nor indirect fitness measures differed 
significantly between within patch and between-patch pairs.
We tested the 
relatedness between patch mates and nonpatch mates using DNA fingerprinting 
(TE-AFLP).
Kinship explained 30% of the genetic variation among patches, 
confirming that patches are often composed of kin.
Overall, we found limited 
male dispersal, lack of kin discrimination, and tolerance to low levels of 
inbreeding.
These results suggest a history of inbreeding which may reduce the 
frequency of deleterious recessive alleles in the population and promote the 
evolution of inbreeding tolerance.
It is likely that the lack of inbreeding 
avoidance in subsocial predecessors has facilitated the transition to regular 
inbreeding social systems.
PMID: 15792236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dietary Omega-3 Fatty Acids and Depression in a Community Sample 1. Nutr Neurosci. 2004 Apr;7(2):101-6. doi: 10.1080/10284150410001710438.

Dietary omega-3 fatty acids and depression in a community sample.

Jacka FN(1)
 Pasco JA, Henry MJ, Kotowicz MA, Nicholson GC, Berk M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical and Biomedical Sciences: Barwon Health, The University 
of Melbourne, PO.
Box 281, Geelong 3220, Vic., Australia.
To evaluate the association between omega-3 polyunsaturated essential fatty 
acids and depression, data regarding prevalence rates of self-reported 
depression and median daily dietary intakes of these fatty acids were obtained 
from an age-stratified, population-based sample of women (n = 755; 23-97 year) 
in the Barwon Statistical Division of south-eastern Australia.
A self-report 
questionnaire based on Diagnostic and Statistical Manual-IV criteria was 
utilised to determine 12-month prevalence rates of depression in this sample, 
and data from biennial food frequency questionnaires examining seafood and fish 
oil consumption over a 6-year period were examined.
Differences in median 
dietary intakes of omega-3 fatty acids between the depressed and nondepressed 
cohorts were analysed and results were adjusted for age, weight and smoking 
status.
No significant differences in median intakes were identified between the 
two groups of women (median, interquartile range; depressed = 0.09g/day, 
0.04-0.18 versus nondepressed = 0.11 g/day, 0.05-0.22, p = 0.3), although 
overall average intakes of omega-3 fatty acids were lower than recommended and 
rates of depression within this sample higher than expected, based on previous 
data.
Further research that takes into account ratios of omega-6 to omega-3 
polyunsaturated essential fatty acids, as well as other dietary sources of 
omega-3 fatty acids, is warranted.
DOI: 10.1080/10284150410001710438
PMID: 15281176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reversal of β-Agonist-Induced Refractoriness in Skin by Tetracaine and Mepacrine 1. J Invest Dermatol. 1983 Apr;80(4):237-40. doi: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12534532.

Reversal of beta-agonist-induced refractoriness in skin by tetracaine and 
mepacrine.

Nemoto O
 Takeda J, Adachi K, Halprin KM, Woodyard CW, Levine V.

We previously reported that in skin slices stimulated by a beta-adrenergic 
agonist, the intracellular cyclic AMP level increased transiently.
The level 
returned to a low steady state in 20-30 min and further stimulation by the 
agonist did not increase the cyclic AMP level.
This state of "refractoriness" 
was found to be specific to the initial stimulator, i.e., histamine but not 
epinephrine could restimulate the cyclic AMP system after an initial exposure to 
epinephrine (Biochim Biophys Acta 497:428-436, 1977).
We now report that 
incubation of skin with mepacrine or tetracaine after beta-adrenergic 
stimulation caused partial recovery from the refractoriness.
Neither the 
simultaneous incubation of skin with epinephrine plus mepacrine (or tetracaine) 
nor preincubation of skin with mepacrine (or tetracaine) before the 
beta-adrenergic stimulation prevented the development of the refractoriness.
Mepacrine inhibited the skin adenylate cyclase catalytic (or the complex of 
GTP-regulatory protein and catalytic) unit.
The available data suggest that 
mepacrine and tetracaine interacted with the agonist-receptor complex at the 
cell membrane.
DOI: 10.1111/1523-1747.ep12534532
PMID: 6131924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pattern Generation for Walking and Searching Movements of a Stick Insect Leg. II. Control of Motoneuronal Activity <jats:p>In the stick insect
 Cuniculina impigra, intracellular recordings from mesothoracic motoneurons that control flexion and extension of the tibia and depression and levation of the trochantero-femur were made while the leg performed walking-like movements on a treadband or stereotyped rhythmic searching movements.
We were interested in how synaptic input and intrinsic properties contribute to form the activity pattern of motoneurons during rhythmic leg movements without sensory feedback from other legs.
During searching and walking, motoneurons expressed a rhythmic bursting pattern that was formed by a depolarizing input followed by a hyperpolarizing input in the inter-burst interval.
This basic pattern was similar in all fast, semi-fast, and slow motoneurons that were recorded.
Hyperpolarizations were in synchrony with activity in the antagonistic motoneurons.
De- and hyperpolarizations were associated with a decrease in input resistance.
All motoneurons showed spike frequency adaptation when depolarized by current injection to a membrane potential similar to that observed during walking.
In the hyperpolarizing phase of fast flexor motoneurons, the initial maximum hyperpolarization was followed by a sag in potential toward more depolarized values.
Consistent with this observation, only fast flexor motoneurons developed a depolarizing sag potential when hyperpolarized by injection of constant negative current.</jats:p>
Isoflurane Decreases ATP Sensitivity of Guinea Pig Cardiac Sarcolemmal KATPChannel at Reduced Intracellular pH <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Background</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Volatile anesthetics can protect the myocardium against ischemic injury by opening the adenosine triphosphate (ATP)-sensitive potassium (K(atp)) channels. However
 direct evidence for anesthetic-channel interaction is still limited, and little is known about the role K(atp) channel modulators play in this effect.
Because pH is one of the regulators of K(atp) channels, the authors tested the hypothesis that intracellular pH (pHi) modulates the direct interaction of isoflurane with the cardiac K(atp) channel.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Methods</jats:title>
            <jats:p>The effects of isoflurane on sarcolemmal K(atp) channels were investigated at pHi 7.4 and pHi 6.8 in excised inside-out membrane patches from ventricular myocytes of guinea pig hearts.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Results</jats:title>
            <jats:p>At pHi 7.4, intracellular ATP (1-1,000 microm) inhibited K(atp) channels and decreased channel open probability (Po) in a concentration-dependent manner with an IC(50) of 8 +/- 1.5 microm, and isoflurane (0.5 mm) either had no effect or decreased channel activity.
Lowering pHi from 7.4 to 6.8 enhanced channel opening by increasing Po and reduced channel sensitivity to ATP, with IC shifting from 8 +/- 1.2 to 45 +/- 5.6 microm.
When applied to the channels activated at pHi 6.8, isoflurane (0.5 mm) increased Po and further reduced ATP sensitivity, shifting IC(50) to 110 +/- 10.0 microm.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Changes in pHi appear to modulate isoflurane interaction with the cardiac K(atp) channel.
At pHi 6.8, which itself facilitates channel opening, isoflurane enhances channel activity by increasing Po and reduces sensitivity to inhibition by ATP without changing the unitary amplitude of single channel current or the conductance.
These results support the hypothesis of direct isoflurane-K(atp) channel interaction that may play a role in cardioprotection by volatile anesthetics.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
[Hepatotoxicity of caffeine and theophylline]. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1970 Apr;20(4):473-6.

[Hepatotoxicity of caffeine and theophylline].

[Article in German]

Strubelt O
 Wegener F, Siegers CP.
PMID: 5467807 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Immunological phenomena in harmless mice during experimental carcinogenesis induced with long-term topical application of 7
 12-dimethylbenzanthracene (DMBA).
1.
Acta Derm Venereol.
1975;55(1):15-9.
Immunological phenomena in harmless mice during experimental carcinogenesis 
induced with long-term topical application of 7, 12-dimethylbenzanthracene 
(DMBA).
Gliński W, Langner A, Obalek S, Marzulli FN.
To estimate the influence of topical treatment with DMBA and induced tumors on 
delayed hypersensitivity, the response of spleen lymphocytes to PHA in vitro and 
macrophage migration inhibition with PHA were studied in DMBA-treated hairless 
mice.
DNA synthesis and blastic transformation of cultured lymphocytes decreased 
after 6-12 weeks of DMBA application.
Lymphocyte response to PHA gradually 
diminished during the experiment, as compared with control animals.
Since the 
malignant transformation of skin tumors was not observed before 16 weeks of DMBA 
carcinogenesis, it seems that derangements in cellular immunity preceded the 
malignant proliferation.
The increase in spleen weight and the absence of 
PHA-induced inhibition of macrophage migration in hairless mice with malignant 
tumors may also be related to the influence of the tumor itself on the lymphatic 
system of experimental animals.
PMID: 46667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Resistance of Oesophagostomum spp. in pigs to pyrantel citrate 1. Vet Parasitol. 1987 May;24(3-4):229-39. doi: 10.1016/0304-4017(87)90044-6.

Resistance of Oesophagostomum spp. in pigs to pyrantel citrate.

Roepstorff A
 Bjørn H, Nansen P.

This study was undertaken to determine whether anthelmintic-resistant 
Oesophagostomum spp.
populations occur in Danish swine herds.
A controlled field 
trial on selected sow herds suggested resistance to pyrantel citrate in a herd 
where faecal egg count depression in response to treatment was only 28.3%.
This 
was confirmed by subsequent experimental infection of pigs where the suspected 
resistant Oesophagostomum isolate was compared with a susceptible worm isolate.
After treatment with the recommended dose of the drug, worm burdens of the 
suspected isolate were only reduced by 42.6% (p greater than 0.05) in contrast 
to the susceptible isolate, which was reduced by 94.6% (p less than 0.01).
Differential counts of the resistant isolate suggested that O. dentatum might be 
more resistant than O. quadrispinulatum.
The resistant isolate originated from a 
herd, where the anthelmintic had been administered four times a year over a 
period of 7 years.
The potential for development of anthelmintic resistance in 
Oesophagostomum spp.
under management practices in our country is discussed in 
the light of the current views on predisposing factors.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-4017(87)90044-6
PMID: 2956755 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Restraint Stress Intensifies Interstitial K+ Accumulation during Severe Hypoxia 1. Front Pharmacol. 2012 Mar 28;3:53. doi: 10.3389/fphar.2012.00053. eCollection 
2012.

Restraint Stress Intensifies Interstitial K(+) Accumulation during Severe 
Hypoxia.

Schnell C(1)
 Janc OA, Kempkes B, Callis CA, Flügge G, Hülsmann S, Müller M.

Author information:
(1)DFG Research Center Molecular Physiology of the Brain, 
Georg-August-Universität Göttingen Göttingen, Germany.
Chronic stress affects neuronal networks by inducing dendritic retraction, 
modifying neuronal excitability and plasticity, and modulating glial cells.
To 
elucidate the functional consequences of chronic stress for the hippocampal 
network, we submitted adult rats to daily restraint stress for 3 weeks 
(6 h/day).
In acute hippocampal tissue slices of stressed rats, basal synaptic 
function and short-term plasticity at Schaffer collateral/CA1 neuron synapses 
were unchanged while long-term potentiation was markedly impaired.
The 
spatiotemporal propagation pattern of hypoxia-induced spreading depression 
episodes was indistinguishable among control and stress slices.
However, the 
duration of the extracellular direct current potential shift was shortened after 
stress.
Moreover, K(+) fluxes early during hypoxia were more intense, and the 
postsynaptic recoveries of interstitial K(+) levels and synaptic function were 
slower.
Morphometric analysis of immunohistochemically stained sections 
suggested hippocampal shrinkage in stressed rats, and the number of cells that 
are immunoreactive for glial fibrillary acidic protein was increased in the CA1 
subfield indicating activation of astrocytes.
Western blots showed a marked 
downregulation of the inwardly rectifying K(+) channel Kir4.1 in stressed rats.
Yet, resting membrane potentials, input resistance, and K(+)-induced inward 
currents in CA1 astrocytes were indistinguishable from controls.
These data 
indicate an intensified interstitial K(+) accumulation during hypoxia in the 
hippocampus of chronically stressed rats which seems to arise from a reduced 
interstitial volume fraction rather than impaired glial K(+) buffering.
One may 
speculate that chronic stress aggravates hypoxia-induced pathophysiological 
processes in the hippocampal network and that this has implications for the 
ischemic brain.
DOI: 10.3389/fphar.2012.00053
PMCID: PMC3314232
PMID: 22470344
[Analysis of the effect of morphine on the reproductive capacity and immunological status of mice]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1979 Oct;88(10):465-7.

[Analysis of the effect of morphine on the reproductive capacity and 
immunological status of mice].

[Article in Russian]

Maĭskiĭ IN
 Aĭrapet'ian GP, Maĭskiĭ AI, Gudkova RB, Skriabina EG.
Embryogenesis process is disturbed under the action of prolonged morphine 
administration to CBA mice.
Simultaneously a decrease in the level of 
antibody-synthesizing cells and a significant reduction in the cooperating 
interaction of T and B lymphocytes in response to the injection of sheep red 
blood cells are noted.
At the same time stimulation of bone marrow cells and 
specific sensitization of MIF-inducers to the antigen from the brain of 
morphinized mice are revealed.
PMID: 574028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of rubomycin C and B on hemopoiesis in rabbits and rats]. 1. Antibiotiki. 1969 Dec;14(12):1092-6.

[Effect of rubomycin C and B on hemopoiesis in rabbits and rats].

[Article in Russian]

Vertogradova TP.

PMID: 5371176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The ectophosphatase activity of cultured endothelial cells of calf aorta and the effect of drugs on ecto-ATPase]. 1. Biomed Biochim Acta. 1989;48(7):431-6.

[The ectophosphatase activity of cultured endothelial cells of calf aorta and 
the effect of drugs on ecto-ATPase].

[Article in German]

Melzig M(1)
 Michalski H, Teuscher E.

Author information:
(1)Sektion Pharmazie, Ernst-Mortiz-Arndt-Universität Greifswald, DDR.
Cultivated endothelial cells of calf aorta (line BKEz-7) possess an effective 
ectophosphatase system (enzyme activities: ATPase 38.0 +/- 10.2; ADPase 9.2 +/- 
4.2; 5'-nucleotidase 4.1 +/- 2.6 fmol/cell.min).
Drugs with central depressive 
activity such as promazine, chlorpromazine, and meprobamate inhibit the activity 
of the ecto-ATPase.
A possible connection between the inhibitory activity on the 
ecto-ATPase and their central depressive effects is discussed.
PMID: 2553007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of Adherence and Phagocytosis of Zymosan Particles by Mouse Peritoneal Macrophages with Hydrocortisone 1. Yakugaku Zasshi. 1982 Jul;102(7):698-700. doi: 10.1248/yakushi1947.102.7_698.

[Inhibition of adherence and phagocytosis of zymosan particles by mouse 
peritoneal macrophages with hydrocortisone].

[Article in Japanese]

Koyama I
 Yamagami H, Kuwae T, Kurata M.

DOI: 10.1248/yakushi1947.102.7_698
PMID: 7153858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
cAMP-Dependent Protein Kinase Mediates Activity-Regulated Synaptic Targeting of NMDA Receptors <jats:p>Chronic activity blockade increases synaptic levels of NMDA receptor immunoreactivity in hippocampal neurons. We show here that blockade-induced synaptic NMDA receptors are functional and mediate enhanced excitotoxicity in response to synaptically released glutamate. Activity blockade increased the cell surface association of NMDA receptors. Blockade-induced synaptic targeting of NMDA receptors did not require protein synthesis but required phosphorylation and specifically cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA). Furthermore
 activation of PKA was sufficient to induce synaptic targeting of NMDA receptors regardless of receptor activity status.
These results implicate PKA activity downstream of receptor blockade as a mediator of enhanced synaptic transport or stabilization of NMDA receptors.
Synaptic clustering of NR1-green fluorescent protein was observed in living neurons in response to NMDA receptor and cAMP phosphodiesterase antagonists and occurred gradually over the course of a day.
This pathway represents a cellular mechanism for synaptic homeostasis and is likely to function in metaplasticity, long-term regulation of the ability of a synapse to undergo potentiation or depression.</jats:p>
Acute coenurosis of dairy sheep from 11 flocks in Greece 1. N Z Vet J. 2012 Jul;60(4):247-53. doi: 10.1080/00480169.2012.665343. Epub 2012
 Apr 16.

Acute coenurosis of dairy sheep from 11 flocks in Greece.

Giadinis ND(1)
 Psychas V, Polizopoulou Z, Papadopoulos E, Papaioannou N, 
Komnenou AT, Thomas AL, Petridou EJ, Kritsepi-Konstantinou M, Lafi SQ, Brellou 
GD.
Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, Aristotle 
University, Thessaloniki , Greece.
ngiadini@vet.auth.gr

CASE HISTORY: A syndrome of acute neurological dysfunction with increased 
mortality was observed in lambs of 10 dairy sheep flocks and adult animals in 
one flock in Central and Northern Greece.
Each farmer completed a questionnaire 
regarding the management and feeding of their flocks.
In seven of the 11 flocks 
the affected animals were grazing pasture, while in the remaining four flocks 
(5, 8, 9, 10) the animals were fed alfalfa hay (Medicago sativa) and 
concentrates indoors.
A follow-up study of the affected flocks was conducted 
during the next 12 months.
CLINICAL FINDINGS: Of 42 sheep with acute coenurosis that were examined, the 
most prominent neurological abnormalities were ataxia, depression, blindness, 
scoliosis, coma and dysmetria.
Except for the four sheep that were comatose, all 
other animals had normal body temperatures and their appetites remained normal 
or were slightly decreased.
Haematological findings of 15 examined sheep were 
within normal limits.
The affected sheep were subject to euthanasia.
A 
histopathological examination was performed in 13 cases.
Faecal samples from 
dogs associated with these flocks were negative for taeniid infections.
During 
the following 12 months cases of chronic coenurosis in these flocks were 
observed.
PATHOLOGICAL FINDINGS: In the 42 animals that were necropsied, the main gross 
findings were cystic formations between 0.5-1 cm in diameter with translucent 
walls that were seen lying free on the leptomeninges or partly penetrating the 
brain tissue, sterile microabscecess and brain necrosis.
Histopathological 
evaluation of tissue sections of 13 brains showed multifocal purulent or 
pyogranulomatous meningoencephalitis, accompanied by eosinophilic infiltrations.
No bacteria were isolated following bacterial culture of brain tissue 
Parasitological examination of the cysts from five cases revealed whitish specks 
on the transparent cyst wall and germination membrane representing the scolices.
DIAGNOSIS: Acute coenurosis was diagnosed in all cases studied.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: Acute coenurosis can be one of the causes of acute 
encephalopathy mainly in lambs, but also in adult sheep.
This condition is 
incurable, but can be controlled by changing the feeding regime.
Cases of 
chronic coenurosis may be seen a few months later in the same flock.
DOI: 10.1080/00480169.2012.665343
PMID: 22506508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
INTENSIFICATION OF THE CENTRAL SEROTONINERGIC PROCESSES AS A POSSIBLE DETERMINANT OF THE THYMOLEPTIC EFFECT 1. Lancet. 1969 Jan 18;1(7586):132-6. doi: 10.1016/s0140-6736(69)91140-4.

Intensification of the central serotoninergic processes as a possible 
determinant of the thymoleptic effect.

Lapin IP
 Oxenkrug GF.
DOI: 10.1016/s0140-6736(69)91140-4
PMID: 4178247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
ERKs regulate PKC-dependent synaptic depression and declustering of glutamate receptors in cerebellar Purkinje cells 1. Neuropharmacology. 2003 Nov;45(6):863-72. doi: 10.1016/s0028-3908(03)00210-7.

ERKs regulate PKC-dependent synaptic depression and declustering of glutamate 
receptors in cerebellar Purkinje cells.

Endo S(1)
 Launey T.

Author information:
(1)Neuronal Circuit Mechanisms Research Group, RIKEN Brain Science Institute, 
Wako 351-0198, Japan.
sendo@riken.jp

Phorbol esters, such as tetradecanoylphorbol 13-acetate (TPA), have been used 
extensively in studies of cerebellar long-term depression (LTD), based on the 
hypothesis that activated protein kinase C (PKC) directly mediates 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor 
phosphorylation.
Here, we show that TPA-induced depression of synaptic 
transmission between granule cells and Purkinje cells in culture is mediated 
through activation of the MEK1/2-ERK1/2 pathway.
Phosphorylation of ERK1/2 
induced by TPA and co-application of high potassium and glutamate was greatly 
attenuated by preincubating Purkinje cells with the MEK1/2 (MAPK ERK kinase 1/2) 
inhibitor PD98059.
TPA-induced depression of synaptic transmission between 
granule cells and Purkinje cells was attenuated by PD98059.
The MEK1/2 inhibitor 
also suppressed declustering of the ionotropic glutamate receptor subunit 2/3 
(GluR2/3) induced by TPA and co-application of high potassium and glutamate, 
even though phosphorylation of Ser880 of GluR2/3 was not inhibited significantly 
in the presence of PD98059.
These results suggest that ERK1/2 plays an essential 
role in TPA-induced depression via regulation of GluR2/3 declustering at the 
synapse.
DOI: 10.1016/s0028-3908(03)00210-7
PMID: 14529724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Verapamil crystalloid cardioplegia: An experimental evaluation of dose-response relationships 1. J Surg Res. 1987 Aug;43(2):164-71. doi: 10.1016/0022-4804(87)90160-0.

Verapamil crystalloid cardioplegia: an experimental evaluation of dose-response 
relationships.

Ouriel K
 Ginsburg ME, Patti CS, Pearce FJ, Hicks GL.
Calcium channel blockers have been advocated as agents which enhance myocardial 
protection during ischemia and reperfusion.
Unfortunately, while cellular 
integrity is preserved, myocardial function is depressed as a result of the 
negative inotropic effects of these agents.
In order to assess the efficacy of 
verapamil cardioplegia, 25 isolated perfused rabbit hearts were studied.
A model 
of normothermic ischemic arrest was utilized, employing either verapamil-free 
crystalloid cardioplegia or cardioplegia containing verapamil in concentrations 
of 0.5, 1.0, or 5.0 mg/liter.
All three verapamil-treated groups demonstrated 
increased postischemic left ventricular developed pressure and improved 
postischemic compliance when compared with the untreated group (P less than 
0.05).
However, myocardial function was significantly depressed at 15 min of 
reperfusion in the 1.0 and 5.0 mg/liter verapamil-treated groups when compared 
with the 0.5 ml/liter group (P less than 0.05).
These data suggest that the 
addition of verapamil to crystalloid cardioplegia results in enhanced myocardial 
function while minimizing the early reperfusion depression associated with 
higher dose therapy.
DOI: 10.1016/0022-4804(87)90160-0
PMID: 3626538 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enteroendocrine hormones — central effects on behavior 1. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2013 Dec;13(6):977-82. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2013.09.004. 
Epub 2013 Oct 1.

Enteroendocrine hormones - central effects on behavior.

Skibicka KP(1)
 Dickson SL.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, The Sahlgrenska Academy at the 
University of Gothenburg, SE-405 30 Gothenburg, Sweden.
A number of appetite-regulating gut hormones alter behaviors linked to reward, 
anxiety/mood, memory and cognitive function, although for some of these (notably 
GLP-1 and CCK) the endogenous signal may be CNS-derived.
From a physiological 
perspective it seems likely that these hormones, whose secretion is altered by 
nutritional status and by bariatric weight loss surgery, orchestrate 
neurobiological effects that are integrated and linked to feeding/metabolic 
control.
Consistent with a role in hunger and meal initiation, ghrelin increases 
motivated behavior for food and, when food is not readily available, decreases 
behaviors in anxiety tests that would otherwise hinder the animal from finding 
food.
Of the many anorexigenic signals, GLP-1 and PYY have been linked to a 
suppressed reward function and CCK (and possibly GLP-1) to increased 
anxiety-like behavior.
Copyright © 2013 The Authors.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.coph.2013.09.004
PMID: 24091195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
CNTF inhibits high voltage activated Ca<sup>2+</sup> currents in fetal mouse cortical neurones <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Neurotrophic factors yield neuroprotection by mechanisms that may be related to their effects as inhibitors of apoptosis as well as their effects on ion channels. The effect of ciliary neurotrophic factor (CNTF) on high‐threshold voltage‐activated Ca channels in cultured fetal mouse brain cortical neurones was investigated. Addition of CNTF into serum‐free growth medium resulted in delayed reduction of the Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> currents. The currents decreased to 50% after 4 h and stabilized at this level during incubation with CNTF for 48 h. Following removal of CNTF the inhibition was completely reversed after 18 h. CNTF reduced the current of all pharmacological subtypes of Ca channels as shown by use of selective blockers of L
 N, and P/Q type Ca channels (nifedipine, ω‐conotoxin MVIIA, ω‐agatoxin IVA).
The Ca channel depression was mediated via the CNTF receptor, because enzymatic cleavage of the α‐subunit glycerophosphatidylinositol anchor of the receptor eliminated the response.
The CNTF effect was not elicited through pertussis toxin‐sensitive G proteins.
Other neurotrophic factors like neurotrophin‐3 and insulin‐like growth factor‐I had no effect on the Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> currents.
These results may have important implications for the possible functions of CNTF in the nervous system, such as altered synaptic activity, neuronal excitability and susceptibility to brain ischaemia.</jats:p>
Diphenylhydantoin and Calcium Movement in Lobster Nerves 1. Arch Neurol. 1974 Oct;31(4):250-4. doi: 10.1001/archneur.1974.00490400064007.

Diphenylhydantoin and calcium movement in lobster nerves.

Hasbani M
 Pincus JH, Lee SH.
DOI: 10.1001/archneur.1974.00490400064007
PMID: 4412829 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In vitro and in vivo evaluation of [11C]MPEPy as a potential PET ligand for mGlu5 receptors 1. Nucl Med Biol. 2006 Nov;33(8):1021-7. doi: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2006.09.007.

In vitro and in vivo evaluation of [11C]MPEPy as a potential PET ligand for 
mGlu5 receptors.

Severance AJ(1)
 Parsey RV, Kumar JS, Underwood MD, Arango V, Majo VJ, 
Prabhakaran J, Simpson NR, Van Heertum RL, Mann JJ.
Author information:
(1)Division of Brain Imaging, Department of Neuroscience, New York State 
Psychiatric Institute, New York, NY 10032, USA.
Excessive activation via the metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype 5 
(mGluR(5)) has been implicated in depression, neuropathic pain and other 
psychiatric, neurological and neurodegenerative diseases.
A mGluR(5) radioligand 
for in vivo quantification by positron emission tomography (PET) would 
facilitate studies of the role of this receptor in disease and treatment.
3-Methoxy-5-pyridin-2-ylethynylpyridine (MPEPy), a selective and high-affinity 
antagonist at the mGluR(5) receptor was selected as a candidate ligand; a recent 
publication by Yu et al.
[Nucl Med Biol 32 (2005) 631-640] presented initial 
micro-PET results for [(11)C]MPEPy with enthusiasm.
Building on their efforts, 
we report as unique contributions (1) an improved chemical synthesis method, (2) 
the first data using human tissue, (3) phosphor images for rat brain 
preparations, (4) a novel comparison of anesthetic agents and (5) in vivo data 
in baboon.
In vitro phosphor imaging studies of this ligand using human and rat 
brain tissue demonstrated high specific binding in the hippocampus, striatum and 
cortex with minimal specific binding in the cerebellum.
In contrast, in vivo 
micro-PET studies in rats using urethane anesthesia, PET studies in baboons 
using isoflurane anesthesia and ex vivo micro-PET studies in unanesthetized rats 
each showed little specific binding in the brain.
Despite the promising in vitro 
results, the low signal-to-noise ratio found in vivo does not justify the use of 
[(11)C]MPEPy as a PET radiotracer in humans.
DOI: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2006.09.007
PMID: 17127176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dietary Selenium Requirement of Fingerling Channel Catfish 1. J Nutr. 1984 Mar;114(3):627-33. doi: 10.1093/jn/114.3.627.

Dietary selenium requirement of fingerling channel catfish.

Gatlin DM 3rd
 Wilson RP.
Two experiments were conducted in aquaria to determine the minimum dietary 
selenium requirement of fingerling channel catfish (Ictalurus punctatus).
Casein-gelatin diets containing graded levels of supplemental selenium (as 
Na2SeO3) ranging from 0 to 15 mg/kg were fed to catfish for 15 weeks in 
experiment 1 to broadly define their selenium requirement and toxicity levels.
Although growth of catfish was affected by dietary selenium level, significant 
differences in weight gain were not easily discernible due to variability among 
the groups of fish.
Weight gain data generally indicated that the basal diet 
containing 0.06 mg Se/kg diet caused growth depression, and a supplemental 
selenium level of 15 mg/kg also caused a reduced growth response, which 
indicated selenium toxicity.
Selenium concentrations in edible muscle tissue 
increased almost linearly with increasing dietary selenium levels.
Liver and 
plasma selenium-dependent glutathione peroxidase (Se GSH-Px) activities 
indicated the selenium requirement of fingerling channel catfish was between 0.1 
and 0.5 mg Se/kg diet.
In experiment 2, casein-gelatin diets containing 
incremental levels of supplemental selenium were fed to catfish for 14 weeks to 
more precisely determine their minimum dietary selenium requirement.
Growth data 
and liver and plasma Se GSH-Px activities indicated that the minimum selenium 
requirement of fingerling channel catfish fed adequate vitamin E was 0.25 mg 
Se/kg dry diet.
Based on these data, it appears that selenium supplementation of 
commercial catfish feeds is warranted.
DOI: 10.1093/jn/114.3.627
PMID: 6699743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Imidazenil
 a non-sedating anticonvulsant benzodiazepine, is more potent than diazepam in protecting against DFP-induced seizures and neuronal damage 1.
Toxicology.
2009 Feb 27;256(3):164-74. doi: 10.1016/j.tox.2008.11.021.
Epub
2008  Dec 7.
Imidazenil, a non-sedating anticonvulsant benzodiazepine, is more potent than 
diazepam in protecting against DFP-induced seizures and neuronal damage.
Kadriu B(1), Guidotti A, Costa E, Auta J.
Author information:
(1)The Psychiatric Institute, Department of Psychiatry, College of Medicine, 
University of Illinois at Chicago, 1601 W. Taylor St., Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
Organophosphate (OP)-nerve agent poisoning may lead to prolonged epileptiform 
seizure activity, which can result in irreversible neuronal brain damage.
A 
timely and effective control of seizures with pharmacological agents can 
minimize the secondary and long-term neuropathology that may result from this 
damage.
Diazepam, the current anticonvulsant of choice in the management of OP 
poisoning, is associated with unwanted effects such as sedation, amnesia, 
cardio-respiratory depression, anticonvulsant tolerance, and dependence 
liabilities.
In search for an efficacious and safer anticonvulsant 
benzodiazepine, we studied imidazenil, a potent anticonvulsant that is devoid of 
sedative action and has a low intrinsic efficacy at alpha1- but is a high 
efficacy positive allosteric modulator at alpha5-containing GABA(A) receptors.
We compared the potency of a combination of 2 mg/kg, i.p.
atropine with: (a) 
imidazenil 0.05-0.5 mg/kg i.p.
or (b) equipotent anti-bicuculline doses of 
diazepam (0.5-5 mg/kg, i.p.
), against diisopropyl fluorophosphate (DFP; 1.5 
mg/kg, s.c.)-induced status epilepticus and its associated neuronal damage.
The 
severity and frequency of seizure activities were determined by continuous radio 
telemetry recordings while the extent of neuronal damage and neuronal 
degeneration were assessed using the TUNEL-based cleaved DNA end-labeling 
technique or neuron-specific nuclear protein (NeuN)-immunolabeling and 
Fluoro-Jade B (FJB) staining, respectively.
We report here that the combination 
of atropine and imidazenil is at least 10-fold more potent and longer lasting 
than the combination with diazepam at protecting rats from DFP-induced seizures 
and the associated neuronal damage or ongoing degeneration in the anterior 
cingulate cortex, CA1 hippocampus, and dentate gyrus.
While 0.5 mg/kg imidazenil 
effectively attenuated DFP-induced neuronal damage and the ongoing neuronal 
degeneration in the anterior cingulate cortex, dentate gyrus, and CA1 
hippocampus, 5 mg/kg or a higher dose of diazepam is required to produce similar 
protective effects.
These finding suggests that imidazenil, a non-sedating 
anticonvulsant BZ ligand, is a more potent, effective, and safer drug than 
diazepam in protecting rats from DFP-induced seizures and the associated 
neuronal damage and/or ongoing neuronal degeneration.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tox.2008.11.021
PMID: 19111886 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Contribution of Peripheral Chemoreception to the Depression of the Hypoxic Ventilatory Response during Halothane Anesthesia in Cats  <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Background</jats:title>
            <jats:p>The effects of inhalational anesthetics on the hypoxic ventilatory response are complex. This study was designed to determine the contribution of peripheral chemoreception to the depression of hypoxic ventilatory response seen with halothane anesthesia.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Methods</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Cats were anesthetized with pentobarbital sodium and alpha-chloralose and artificially ventilated. Respiratory output was evaluated by phasic inspiratory activity of the phrenic nerve. In 12 cats
 this activity was measured during inhalation of an hypoxic gas mixture with halothane, 0, 0.1, and 0.8%, with intact or denervated carotid bodies.
In 10 cats, a carotid body was isolated from the systemic circulation and perfused with hypoxic Krebs-Ringer solution equilibrated with halothane, 0, 0.1, and 0.8%.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Results</jats:title>
            <jats:p>The hypoxic ventilatory response was depressed in a dose-dependent manner during halothane anesthesia.
In carotid body perfusion studies, the response was significantly depressed only with halothane, 0.80%.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Conclusion</jats:title>
            <jats:p>The hypoxic ventilatory response is depressed by a high dose of halothane through a peripheral effect at the carotid body.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
Short- and long-term synaptic depression in rat neostriatum <jats:p> 1. We have examined plasticity at glutamatergic synapses on neurons in slices of neostriatum
 a forebrain area involved in movement and cognitive function.
2.
High-frequency stimulation of afferent inputs to neostriatal neurons induced depression of glutamatergic synaptic transmission.
Depression could be induced using either prolonged trains or short repetitive bursts of high-frequency stimulation.
Depression developed within seconds after such stimulation.
Responses recovered to baseline levels within 10 min in most slices but persisted for up to 60 min in others.
3.
Postsynaptic passive electrical properties and the ability to elicit action potentials by postsynaptic depolarization were not altered during depression.
4.
The magnitude and time course of depression was similar whether postsynaptic responses were mediated by alpha amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) or N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) type glutamate receptors.
Depression was not altered by antagonism of AMPA or NMDA receptors or potentiation of AMPA receptor function with aniracetam.
5.
Depression was blocked by treatments that increase transmitter release including increased extracellular Ca2+, application of 4-aminopyridine, or application of phorbol ester.
6.
Our findings indicate that glutamatergic synapses in neostriatum are capable of expressing a form of synaptic depression that may involve decreased glutamate release.
</jats:p>
Studies on the organization of the brush border in intestinal epithelial cells 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1967;135(5):959-65. doi: 10.1016/0005-2736(67)90065-x.

Studies on the organization of the brush border in intestinal epithelial cells. 
IV. Aminopeptidase activity in microvillus membranes of hamster intestinal brush 
borders.

Rhodes JB
 Eichholz A, Crane RK.
DOI: 10.1016/0005-2736(67)90065-x
PMID: 4965166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Toxic Effects of Di-n-octyltin Dichloride on the Thymus in Mice 1. Arch Toxicol Suppl. 1979;(2):315-20. doi: 10.1007/978-3-642-67265-1_29.

Toxic effects of di-n-octyltin dichloride on the thymus in mice.

Hennighausen G
 Lange P.

The effects of di-n-octyltin dichloride (DOTC) on the thymus in mice were 
studied in dependence on the route of administration.
Single administrations of 
30, 60 and 120 mg/kg of DOTC i.m.
induced a dose-related decrease of the thymus 
weight and of the number of nucleated cells in the thymus of male mice.
4 days 
after intravenous injection of 8 mg/kg of DOTC the thymus weight and the number 
of thymocytes were reduced to 50 percent of the control.
In oral route of 
administration higher doses of DOTC (300 mg/kg) were necessary to provoke a 
thymus atrophy.
After pretreatment of mice with carbon tetrachloride the toxic 
effects of orally administered DOTC were increased.
The reduction of the thymus 
weight and of the number of thymocytes in mice after parenteral administration 
was accompanied by a depression of thymus-dependent antibody formation against 
sheep red blood cells.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-642-67265-1_29
PMID: 288338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Epigenetic regulation of BDNF in the learned helplessness-induced animal model of depression 1. J Psychiatr Res. 2016 May;76:101-10. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2016.02.008.
Epub  2016 Feb 13.

Epigenetic regulation of BDNF in the learned helplessness-induced animal model 
of depression.

Su CL(1)
 Su CW(1), Hsiao YH(1), Gean PW(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng-Kung 
University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng-Kung 
University, Tainan 701, Taiwan.
Electronic address: powu@mail.ncku.edu.tw.
Major depressive disorder (MDD), one of the most common mental disorders, is a 
significant risk factor for suicide and causes a low quality of life for many 
people.
However, the causes and underlying mechanism of depression remain 
elusive.
In the current work, we investigated epigenetic regulation of BDNF in 
the learned helplessness-induced animal model of depression.
Mice were exposed 
to inescapable stress and divided into learned helplessness (LH) and resilient 
(LH-R) groups depending on the number they failed to escape.
We found that the 
LH group had longer immobility duration in the forced swimming test (FST) and 
tail suspension tests (TST), which is consistent with a depression-related 
phenotype.
Western blotting analysis and enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) revealed that the LH group had lower BDNF expression than that of the 
LH-R group.
The LH group consistently had lower BDNF mRNA levels, as detected by 
qPCR assay.
In addition, we found BDNF exon IV was down-regulated in the LH 
group.
Intraperitoneal injection of imipramine or histone deacetylase inhibitors 
(HDACi) to the LH mice for 14 consecutive days ameliorated depression-like 
behaviors and reversed the decrease in BDNF.
The expression of HDAC5 was 
up-regulated in the LH mice, and a ChIP assay revealed that the level of HDAC5 
binding to the promoter region of BDNF exon IV was higher than that seen in 
other groups.
Knockdown of HDAC5 reduced depression-like behaviors in the LH 
mice.
Taken together, these results suggest that epigenetic regulation of BDNF 
by HDAC5 plays an important role in the learned helplessness model of 
depression.
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2016.02.008
PMID: 26921875 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of Insulin Secretion by Aryl-substituted Secondary Aminoethanols <jats:p>The administration of glucose
 tolbutamide, ACTH, and glucagon to mice resulted in increase of plasma insulin levels.
These increases were all inhibited by the prior administration of aryl-substituted secondary aminoethanols (ASAE).
Cyclic 3′,5′ AMP resulted in increased levels of plasma insulin in intact mice, and this stimulatory effect was also inhibited by the aryl-substituted secondary aminoethanols.
The locus of the inhibitory effect of these compounds on insulin secretion is discussed.</jats:p>
Lamotrigine ameliorates seizures and psychiatric comorbidity in a rat model of spontaneous absence epilepsy <jats:title>Summary</jats:title><jats:p><jats:bold>Purpose: </jats:bold> Lamotrigine (LTG) is an effective clinical treatment for epilepsy associated with absence seizures. However
 the impact of LTG administration in studies employing various animal models of epilepsy remains controversial.
This study aimed to clarify the outcomes of LTG treatment on absence seizures and comorbid anxiety and depression disorders in Long‐Evans rats with spontaneous spike‐wave discharges (SWDs).</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Methods: </jats:bold> LTG (10 mg/kg) or water vehicle was chronically administered perorally to Long‐Evans rats (twice daily for 35 days).
Cortical activities were recorded to assess the presence of SWDs.
Five behavioral tests, including the open field (OF), elevated plus maze (EPM), sucrose consumption (SC), sucrose preference, and forced swimming (FS) tests, were performed after LTG/vehicle treatment.
The behavioral indexes of these tests were designed to assess anxiety (OF and EPM tests), depression (SC and FS tests), and preference for hedonistic stimuli (sugar preference test).</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Key Findings: </jats:bold> Total SWD duration, SWD number, and mean SWD duration were significantly decreased in rats that received 35‐day LTG treatment compared with rats that received vehicle treatment.
Rats with spontaneous SWDs versus rats with no SWDs showed significant levels of anxiety and depression in the OF, EPM, and SC tests.
Rats with SWDs also showed longer immobility in the FS test.
However, the LTG‐treated group compared with the vehicle group presented with significantly lower manifestations of anxiety and depression in the OF, EPM, SC, and sucrose preference tests and shorter immobility in the FS test.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Significance: </jats:bold> The results of this study suggest that chronic LTG treatment can benefit patients with epilepsy via suppression of absence seizures and amelioration of comorbid anxiety and depression.</jats:p>
Regulation of plasticity of glutamate synapses by endocannabinoids and the cyclic‐AMP/protein kinase A pathway in midbrain dopamine neurons <jats:p>Endocannabinoids (eCBs) are lipid signalling molecules which play a key role in the regulation of synaptic transmission and plasticity in the central nervous system. Previous studies have reported that eCBs are released ‘on demand’ in the ventral tegmental area (VTA)
 a brain region critical for reward learning.
However, their role in modulating the long‐term plasticity of glutamate synapses of VTA dopamine (DA) neurons remains unknown.
In the present study, we showed that low frequency afferent stimulation paired with moderate postsynaptic depolarization elicited an <jats:italic>N</jats:italic>‐methyl‐<jats:sc>d</jats:sc>‐aspartate (NMDA) receptor‐independent long‐term depression (LTD) at glutamate synapses of VTA DA neurons.
This form of LTD was caused by a decrease in the probability of glutamate release.
Examination of the mechanisms underlying this form of LTD revealed that it was mediated by retrograde eCB signalling.
In addition, we found that inhibition of 2‐arachidonoyl glycerol biosynthesis blocked LTD induction, suggesting that 2‐arachidonoyl glycerol is the most likely retrograde eCB messenger mediating LTD.
The eCB‐LTD induced at glutamate synapses of VTA DA neurons also required the inhibition of the presynaptic cAMP/PKA pathway.
Taken together, these results reveal a critical role of eCBs in controlling the long‐term plasticity of glutamate synapses in VTA DA neurons.</jats:p>
Efficiency of selection
 as measured by single nucleotide polymorphism variation, is dependent on inbreeding rate in <i>Drosophila melanogaster</i> <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>It is often hypothesized that slow inbreeding causes less inbreeding depression than fast inbreeding at the same absolute level of inbreeding.
Possible explanations for this phenomenon include the more efficient purging of deleterious alleles and more efficient selection for heterozygote individuals during slow, when compared with fast, inbreeding.
We studied the impact of inbreeding rate on the loss of heterozygosity and on morphological traits in <jats:italic>Drosophila melanogaster</jats:italic>.
We analysed five noninbred control lines, 10 fast inbred lines and 10 slow inbred lines; the inbred lines all had an expected inbreeding coefficient of approximately 0.25.
Forty single nucleotide polymorphisms in DNA coding regions were genotyped, and we measured the size and shape of wings and counted the number of sternopleural bristles on the genotyped individuals.
We found a significantly higher level of genetic variation in the slow inbred lines than in the fast inbred lines.
This higher genetic variation was resulting from a large contribution from a few loci and a smaller effect from several loci.
We attributed the increased heterozygosity in the slow inbred lines to the favouring of heterozygous individuals over homozygous individuals by natural selection, either by associative over‐dominance or balancing selection, or a combination of both.
Furthermore, we found a significant polynomial correlation between genetic variance and wing size and shape in the fast inbred lines.
This was caused by a greater number of homozygous individuals among the fast inbred lines with small, narrow wings, which indicated inbreeding depression.
Our results demonstrated that the same amount of inbreeding can have different effects on genetic variance depending on the inbreeding rate, with slow inbreeding leading to higher genetic variance than fast inbreeding.
These results increase our understanding of the genetic basis of the common observation that slow inbred lines express less inbreeding depression than fast inbred lines.
In addition, this has more general implications for the importance of selection in maintaining genetic variation.</jats:p>
Inactivation of potassium current in squid axon by a variety of quaternary ammonium ions. <jats:p>The characteristics of potassium channel block by a diverse group of quaternary ammonium (QA) ions was examined in squid axons. Altering the size and nature of the head and/or tail groups of the QA ions applied internally produced only quantitative differences in the potassium current block. Although their entry rate is diminished
 compounds with head groups as large as 11 X 12 A are capable of occluding the channel, whereas the smallest QA ions, with head groups approximately 5 X 6 A, are not potent blockers.
When one or three terminal hydrogens of the head group were replaced by hydroxyl moieties, the compound's blocking ability was diminished, suggesting that QA binding is not improved by hydrogen bonding at these positions.
QA ions bound to their site within the potassium channel with 1:1 stoichiometry, and the site is perhaps 20% or more of the distance through the membrane electric field.
Raising external potassium concentration did not alter the steady-state or kinetic features of the QA block of outward potassium currents; however, increasing temperature or adding Ba2+ internally increased the rate of decay of the QA-blocked currents.
From the structure-function analysis of the QA ions, projections concerning both the architecture of the potassium channel's inner mouth and the significance of various chemical constituents of the ions were made.
The potassium channel may now be pictured as having a wider mouth (up to 11 X 12 A) extending to the QA binding site and then narrowing quickly to the region of channel selectivity.
Important alterations that improve the blocking ability of the compounds include: (a) lengthening the alkyl hydrocarbon tail group (up to 10 carbon), (b) lengthening a second hydrocarbon chain of the head group (e.g., decyldimethylphenylammonium bromide [C10DM phi]), and (c) adding a carbonyl moiety to the tail (e.g., ambutonium).</jats:p>
Visceral Leishmaniasis (Kala-Azar) as an Opportunistic Infection in Patients Infected with the Human Immunodeficiency Virus in Spain 1. Rev Infect Dis. 1989 Jul-Aug;11(4):655-60. doi: 10.1093/clinids/11.4.655.

Visceral leishmaniasis (kala-azar) as an opportunistic infection in patients 
infected with the human immunodeficiency virus in Spain.

Montalban C(1)
 Martinez-Fernandez R, Calleja JL, Garcia-Diaz JD, Rubio R, 
Dronda F, Moreno S, Yebra M, Barros C, Cobo J, et al.
Author information:
(1)Division of Internal Medicine, Hospital Ramon y Cajal, Universidad de Alcala, 
Madrid, Spain.
Comment in
    Rev Infect Dis.
1990 Mar-Apr;12(2):370-1. doi: 10.1093/clinids/12.2.370.
In an area endemic for visceral leishmaniasis, 16 patients with human 
immunodeficiency virus (HIV) infection developed the disease.
All belonged to 
populations at risk for AIDS (15 were intravenous drug abusers).
Five patients 
fulfilled the criteria for full-blown AIDS, and two more fulfilled them after 
diagnosis of leishmaniasis.
All presented with the classic manifestations of 
visceral leishmaniasis, but leishmania serology was negative in 15 patients 
(93%).
Leishmania donovani amastigotes were identified in the bone marrow in all 
cases.
Most patients responded initially to treatment with pentavalent 
antimonial drugs, but seven (43%) followed a chronic course, with multiple 
relapses in five, despite alternative treatments.
Visceral leishmaniasis 
occurred in patients with different levels of depression of the CD4 to CD8 
lymphocyte ratio.
Mortality was 37% (six patients) and was independent of the 
chronic-relapsing course of the disease.
In no case was leishmaniasis the 
primary cause of death.
Our data establish that visceral leishmaniasis is an 
opportunistic infection in HIV-infected patients, and we suggest that in endemic 
areas it should be considered an indicator disease for the diagnosis of AIDS.
DOI: 10.1093/clinids/11.4.655
PMID: 2672242 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
THE CONTRACEPTIVE ACTION OF IMPEDING OESTROGENS 1. J Reprod Fertil. 1971 Sep;26(3):365-7. doi: 10.1530/jrf.0.0260365.

The contraceptive action of impeding oestrogens. VII. Effectiveness of oestriol 
in the rabbit and the hamster.

Scublinsky A
 Wotiz HH.
DOI: 10.1530/jrf.0.0260365
PMID: 5569651 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The role of heme synthesis during the induction of hepatic microsomal cytochrome P-450 and drug metabolism produced by benzpyrene 1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1969 Aug 15;36(4):526-32. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(69)90336-2.

The role of heme synthesis during the induction of hepatic microsomal cytochrome 
P-450 and drug metabolism produced by benzpyrene.

Baron J
 Tephly TR.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(69)90336-2
PMID: 4390185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Aminophylline and theophylline derivatives as antagonists of neuronal depression by adenosine: a microiontophoretic study. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1980 Aug;246(2):205-14.

Aminophylline and theophylline derivatives as antagonists of neuronal depression 
by adenosine: a microiontophoretic study.

Perkins MN
 Stone TW.
Aminophylline, theophylline, etamiphylline and diprophylline have been tested as 
antagonists of neuronal inhibition produced by microiontophoretically applied 
adenosine, when ejected as cations or anions.
Aminophylline proved to be an 
effective adenosine antagonist when ejected as an anion, especially from 
alkaline solution.
Anionic theophylline was also effective but less so, and on a 
smaller proportion of neurones.
Ethylenediamine and hydroxyl ions had no effect 
on adenosine responses.
GABA depressions were unaffected by any of the 
methylxanthines at the time of adenosine blockade.
Cationic ejection from 
aminophylline or ethylenediamine barrels produced a depression of unit firing on 
about one third of the cells tested, but no antagonism of adenosine was 
observed.
It is concluded that the anionic ejection of aminophylline from 
alkaline solution, or of etamiphylline of diprophylline, yields potentially 
useful antagonists of adenosine for iontophoretic experiments.
PMID: 7436627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The role of tissue basophils in the regulation of the secretory activity of macrophages]. 1. Fiziol Zh (1978). 1991 Jan-Feb;37(1):89-94.

[The role of tissue basophils in the regulation of the secretory activity of 
macrophages].

[Article in Russian]

Bashmakov IuK
 Sidorenko TV, Diugovskaia LA.
Mast cells and macrophages isolated from sensitized rats are unequivalent 
producer of enzymes in systems in vitro.
Allergen intensifies exocytosis of acid 
phosphatase in them but the activity of allergen-induced enzyme secretion by 
macrophages ++ in immunized rats is lower than the activity of spontaneous 
secretion of acid phosphatase in suspensions of macrophages + in nonimmunized 
rats.
Macrophages rather than mast cells show the ability for exocytosis of 
C4-gamma-glutamyltranspeptidase, leukotriene++ catabolism enzyme.
Cocultivation 
of immune macrophages with syngeneic mast cells in the presence of allergen is 
followed with sharp depression of the activity of this enzyme secretion, that 
can create conditions for prolongation of eicosanoid effects in allergy.
PMID: 1676002 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Vagus nerve stimulation in treating depression: A tale of two stories. 1. Curr Mol Med. 2016;16(1):33-9. doi: 10.2174/1566524016666151222143609.

Vagus nerve stimulation in treating depression: A tale of two stories.

Yuan TF(1)
 Li A(2), Sun X, Arias-Carrión O, Machado S(3).
Author information:
(1)School of Psychology, Nanjing Normal University, Nanjing, China.
ytf0707@126.com.
(2)GHMICR, Jinan University, Guangzhou, China.
anglijnu@jnu.edu.cn.
(3)Institute de Psychiatry, Federal University of Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
secm80@gmail.com.
Vagus nerve stimulation (VNS) has been widely used to treat different 
neurological disorders, especially epilepsy.
Accumulating evidence also suggests 
its potential application in antidepressive therapy, given that VNS has been 
confirmed by several clinical trials to exert long-term effects on mitigating 
depression and reducing the risk of relapse in depressed patients.
Likewise, VNS 
has also proven to ameliorate the behavioral deficits in a rat model of 
depression.
While the influences of VNS on monoamine metabolism and mood 
improvement are well-recognized, the underlying mechanisms mediating its 
antidepressive action remain poorly understood.
Recent findings suggest that 
VNS-enhanced proliferation of hippocampal neural progenitor cells (NPCs) and 
synaptic transmission might serve as a monoamine-independent pathway 
contributive to the beneficial effects of VNS on depression.
Here we briefly 
reviewed the recent progress in this field, based on which we propose that there 
might be, at least, two little-overlapped, and yet interactive pathways 
mediating the antidepressive action of VNS.
DOI: 10.2174/1566524016666151222143609
PMID: 26695696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of 5-fluorouracil on drug-metabolizing enzymes in the rat. 1. Cancer Res. 1974 May;34(5):927-31.

Effects of 5-fluorouracil on drug-metabolizing enzymes in the rat.

Klubes P
 Cerna I.

PMID: 4823903 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of high temperature and exposure to air on mussel (Mytilus galloprovincialis
 Lmk 1819) hemocyte phagocytosis: Modulation of spreading and oxidative response 1.
Tissue Cell.
2013 Jun;45(3):198-203. doi: 10.1016/j.tice.2012.12.002.
Epub
2013  Jan 31.
Effects of high temperature and exposure to air on mussel (Mytilus 
galloprovincialis, Lmk 1819) hemocyte phagocytosis: modulation of spreading and 
oxidative response.
Mosca F(1), Narcisi V, Calzetta A, Gioia L, Finoia MG, Latini M, Tiscar PG.
Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Biomediche Comparate, Università degli Studi di 
Teramo, Piazza Aldo Moro 45, 64100 Teramo, Italy.
Hemocytes are a critical component of the mussel defense system and the present 
study aims at investigating their spreading and oxidative properties during 
phagocytosis under in vivo experimental stress conditions.
The spreading ability 
was measured by an automated cell analyzer on the basis of the circularity, a 
parameter corresponding to the hemocyte roundness.
The oxidative activity was 
investigated by micromethod assay, measuring the respiratory burst as expression 
of the fluorescence generated by the oxidation of specific probe.
Following the 
application of high temperature and exposure to air, there was evidence of 
negative modulation of spreading and oxidative response, as revealed by a cell 
roundness increase and fluorescence generation decrease.
Therefore, the fall of 
respiratory burst appeared as matched with the inhibition of hemocyte 
morphological activation, suggesting a potential depression of the phagocytosis 
process and confirming the application of the circularity parameter as potential 
stress marker, both in experimental and field studies.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tice.2012.12.002
PMID: 23375726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of dietary raw and autoclaved soya-bean protein fractions on growth
 pancreatic enlargement and pancreatic enzymes in rats <jats:p>1.
Raw soya-bean meal (RS) was fractionated into soya-bean lyophilized extract (SLE), soya-bean lyophilized residue (SLR), acid-precipitated proteins (APP) and whey proteins.</jats:p><jats:p>2.
Trypsin (<jats:italic>EC</jats:italic> 3.4.21.4) and chymotrypsin (<jats:italic>EC</jats:italic> 3.4.21.1) inhibitors (TI) were soluble at pH 8 and remained soluble after the extract was acidified to pH 4·4.
Except for whey, heating abolished, almost totally, their inhibiting activity.</jats:p><jats:p>3.
Feeding SLE diet (high TI content) and APP diet (low TI content) resulted in growth depression below the RS level.
Feeding the SLR diet resulted in an optimal growth.
Feeding diets containing heated fractions improved the growth rate though not to the level observed with heated RS (HS) diet.</jats:p><jats:p>4.
RS, SLE, APP and whey diets produced similar pancreatic enlargement which could be totally (RS, whey) or partially (SLE, APP) abolished by heating.</jats:p><jats:p>5.
Feeding the RS diet reduced pancreatic amylase content.
The factor responsible for this effect cofractionated with SLE and whey proteins.</jats:p><jats:p>6.
Two groups of factors in the various diets were probably responsible for the elevation in pancreatic proteases.
The first group were the heat-labile factors present in RS, SLE and whey whereas the second group resisted the heat treatment and were found in APP and SLR.</jats:p><jats:p>7.
The results suggest that for optimal growth rate of rats, heat treatment should be given to the unfractionated soya-bean proteins rather than to the isolated fractions.
The results further indicated that TI are not the only factors that can lead to pancreatic enlargement and changes in pancreatic enzymes composition.</jats:p>
Design and Synthesis of Novel Arylpiperazine Derivatives Containing the Imidazole Core Targeting 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> Receptor and 5-HT Transporter 1. J Med Chem. 2011 Sep 22;54(18):6305-18. doi: 10.1021/jm200682b. Epub 2011 Aug 
23.

Design and synthesis of novel arylpiperazine derivatives containing the 
imidazole core targeting 5-HT(2A) receptor and 5-HT transporter.

Seo HJ(1)
 Park EJ, Kim MJ, Kang SY, Lee SH, Kim HJ, Lee KN, Jung ME, Lee M, Kim 
MS, Son EJ, Park WK, Kim J, Lee J.
Author information:
(1)Research Center, Green Cross Corporation, 303 Bojeong-dong, Giheung-gu, 
Yongin 446-770, Korea.
Serotonin antagonist reuptake inhibitor (SARI) drugs that block both 5-HT(2) 
receptors and the serotonin transporters have been developed.
The human 
5-HT(2A/2C) receptor has been implicated in several neurological conditions, and 
potent selective 5-HT(2A/2C) ligands may have therapeutic potential for 
treatment of CNS diseases such as depression.
An imidazole moiety usually 
provides good pharmacokinetic properties as a drug substance, and thus 
considerable efforts have been devoted to develop imidazole derivatives into 
drug candidates.
The imidazole series of compounds was evaluated against 
5-HT(2A/2C) and serotonin reuptake inhibition.
A few of the compounds in the 
series showed promising IC(50) values and antidepressant-like effect in in vivo 
forced swimming test (FST).
On the basis of these results, further lead 
optimization studies resulted in identifying promising compounds potentially for 
therapeutic use.
DOI: 10.1021/jm200682b
PMID: 21823597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
DPAVP: A vasopressin analog with selective mcirovascular and res actions for the treatment of circulatory shock in rats 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1976 May;37(1):155-67. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(76)90018-2.

DPAVP: a vasopressin analog with selective microvascular and RES actions for the 
treatment of circulatory shock in rats.

Altura BM.

The present study indicates that: (a) local administration of low concentrations 
of an analog of vasopressin
 1-deamino-[2-phenylalanine, 8-arginine]-vasopressin 
(DPAVP), constricts venules in the rat splanchnic terminal vascular bed of 
normal animals, unlike that seen for catecholamines; (b) maximal concentrations 
of DPAVP narrow but do not occlude both arterioles and venules: (c) microscopic 
muscular venules (31-39 mu i.d.)
do not narrow more than 20% in response to the 
vasopressin analog DPAVP; and (d) terminal arterioles (17-23 mu i.d.)
do not 
narrow more than 50% in response to DPAVP.
Systemic administration of DPAVP to 
rats subjected to hemorrhage or bowel ischemia shock more than doubles survival 
rates over control rats receiving Ringer solution.
Infusion of DPAVP produces a 
dose-dependent effect on arterial blood pressure, microscopic capacitance 
vessels, large arterioles and small arteries.
In addition, i.v.
administration 
of DPAVP: (a) returns arterial hematocrit towards normal after shock; and (b) 
regenerates and sustains vasomotion and venular tone, decreases microvascular 
hyperreactivity characteristic of shock syndromes, restores constricted 
arteriolar lumen sizes towards normal, predisposes to a splanchnic microbed 
virtually free of stasis, petechiae and leukocytic sticking, and restores 
capillary perfusion and outflow to near-normal.
Further, DPAVP effectively 
restores the early reticuloendothelial system (RES) phagocytic depression, 
characteristic of shock syndromes, to normal; the latter eventuating in RES 
hyper-phagocytic activity.
These findings indicate it is possible to synthesize 
vasoactive molecules which: (a) exert selective microvascular and RES phagocytic 
effects; and (b) are highly beneficial in the therapy of low-flow states, at 
least in rats.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(76)90018-2
PMID: 1278238 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant-like effects of serotonin type-3 antagonist
 ondansetron: an investigation in behaviour-based rodent models 1.
Behav Pharmacol.
2008 Feb;19(1):29-40. doi: 10.1097/FBP.0b013e3282f3cfd4.
Antidepressant-like effects of serotonin type-3 antagonist, ondansetron: an 
investigation in behaviour-based rodent models.
Ramamoorthy R(1), Radhakrishnan M, Borah M.

Author information:
(1)Pharmacy Group, Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Faculty Division - 
III, Pilani, Rajasthan, India.
rajkumarrna@yahoo.com

The present behavioural investigation evaluates the antidepressant potential of 
ondansetron (OND), a widely used (in management of cancer chemotherapy-induced 
nausea and emesis) 5-HT3 receptor antagonist.
Separate groups of mice received 
acute or chronic treatment of OND (0.005-1000 microg/kg), and were subjected to 
spontaneous locomotor activity test or antidepressant assays, namely, the forced 
swim and tail suspension tests.
Interaction studies with fluoxetine, 
venlafaxine, desipramine and 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino) tetralin were 
conducted in the forced swim test.
The effect of OND (0.01-1000 microg/kg) in 
combination with paroxetine (10 mg/kg, for 14 days) on the behaviour of male 
bulbectomized or sham-operated rats was also assessed.
The postbulbectomy 
behavioural analysis included exploration in the open field and elevated plus 
maze.
OND exhibited a biphasic dose-response profile, with antidepressant-like 
effects peaking at 0.1 microg/kg, in the forced swim and tail suspension tests.
None of the tested doses influenced spontaneous locomotor activity.
Chronic OND 
pretreatment augmented the antidepressant effects of fluoxetine and venlafaxine 
but did not influence the effects of desipramine or 
8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-propylamino) tetralin.
Chronic OND (10 microg/kg) reversed 
hyperactivity in the open field, and decreased the percentage entry and time 
spent in open arms in the elevated plus maze.
Summing up, it is observed that 
OND exhibits antidepressant-like effects, possibly mediated through postsynaptic 
5-HT3 receptors.
DOI: 10.1097/FBP.0b013e3282f3cfd4
PMID: 18195592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Comparative reactivity of the neo-
 paleo- and archicortex of the brain under conditions of ether and hexanal anesthesia].
1.
Farmakol Toksikol.
1977 Mar-Apr;40(2):137-41.
[Comparative reactivity of the neo-, paleo- and archicortex of the brain under 
conditions of ether and hexanal anesthesia].
[Article in Russian]

Batrak GE, Khrustalev SI, Iarosh AK.
In acute experiments on dogs subject to investigation under ether- and 
hexobarbital sodium-induced anesthesia was comparative reactivity of the 
neo-(sensomotor region), paleo-(hippocampus) and archicortex (olfactory lobe) of 
the brain.
It was found that following administration of low and medium doses of 
general anesthetics more marked EEG changes, with but an insignificant 
inhibition of respirations and a slight fall in arterial pressure, were observed 
to occur in the hippocampus and in the olfactory lobe, as against the 
biocurrents in the sensomotor region.
Such a regularity continued for as long as 
the oxygen tension in the neocortex was maintained at a level higher than in the 
paleo-and archicortex.
Upon introduction of toxic ether and hexobarbital doses 
the oxygen tension in the neocortex dropped earlier and the inhibition of its 
bioelectric activity would set in concurrently or sooner than in the olfactory 
lobe and in the hippocampus.
PMID: 852555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
High levels of the circulating form of parathyroid hormone do not inhibit in vitro erythropoiesis. 1. J Lab Clin Med. 1983 Oct;102(4):613-20.

High levels of the circulating form of parathyroid hormone do not inhibit in 
vitro erythropoiesis.

Delwiche F
 Garrity MJ, Powell JS, Robertson RP, Adamson JW.
Either primary or secondary hyperparathyroidism may be associated with anemia.
The pathogenesis of this anemia remains obscure, but parathyroid hormone may 
directly suppress erythropoiesis or anemia may result from myelofibrosis.
Previously reported in vitro studies of a direct inhibitory effect of PTH on 
erythroid progenitor growth were carried out with crude hormone preparations and 
appeared nonspecific.
We have studied simultaneously the in vitro effects of 
pure (greater than 6000 U/mg) and crude (130 U/mg) preparations of PTH on murine 
and human hematopoietic progenitor growth.
Increasing concentrations (2.5 to 20 
U/ml) of crude PTH produced a dose-dependent inhibition of early erythroid 
(BFU-E) and granulocyte/macrophage progenitor (CFU-GM) growth in human and mouse 
marrow cell cultures.
However, the biologically active N-terminal fragment 
containing amino acids 1-34 and the pure intact molecule of 84 amino acids 
failed to significantly inhibit hematopoietic colony growth.
These observations 
demonstrate that in vitro inhibitory effects described with parathyroid gland 
extracts are not specific for erythropoiesis and may not be related to the 
circulating form of PTH.
PMID: 6311928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differences in the sensitivity to hydrocortisone of erythropoiesis in the bone marrow and the spleen of fasting adrenalectomized mice. 1. Folia Biol (Praha). 1971;17(1):33-6.

Differences in the sensitivity to hydrocortisone of erythropoiesis in the bone 
marrow and the spleen of fasting adrenalectomized mice.

Pospísil M
 Zakopalová I.

PMID: 5550396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Brain responses to chronic social defeat stress: Effects on regional oxidative metabolism as a function of a hedonic trait
 and gene expression in susceptible and resilient rats 1.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol.
2011 Jan;21(1):92-107. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2010.06.015.
Epub 2010 Jul 24.
Brain responses to chronic social defeat stress: effects on regional oxidative 
metabolism as a function of a hedonic trait, and gene expression in susceptible 
and resilient rats.
Kanarik M(1), Alttoa A, Matrov D, Kõiv K, Sharp T, Panksepp J, Harro J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Estonian Centre of Behavioural and Health Sciences, 
University of Tartu, Tiigi 78, 50410 Tartu, Estonia.
Chronic social defeat stress, a depression model in rats, reduced struggling in 
the forced swimming test dependent on a hedonic trait-stressed rats with high 
sucrose intake struggled less.
Social defeat reduced brain regional energy 
metabolism, and this effect was also more pronounced in rats with high sucrose 
intake.
A number of changes in gene expression were identified after social 
defeat stress, most notably the down-regulation of Gsk3b and Map1b.
The majority 
of differences were between stress-susceptible and resilient rats.
Conclusively, 
correlates of inter-individual differences in stress resilience can be 
identified both at gene expression and oxidative metabolism levels.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP.
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2010.06.015
PMID: 20656462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pharmacological evaluation of the antagonism of nicotine's central effects by mecamylamine and pempidine. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1990 Jul;254(1):45-51.

Pharmacological evaluation of the antagonism of nicotine's central effects by 
mecamylamine and pempidine.

Martin TJ(1)
 Suchocki J, May EL, Martin BR.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Medical College of 
Virginia/Virginia Commonwealth University, Richmond.
The nature of mecamylamine's and pempidine's antagonism of nicotine in the 
central nervous system has not been defined clearly.
Although these compounds 
are thought to be noncompetitive antagonists in the brain due to the fact that 
they do not compete effectively for agonist binding to brain tissue in vitro, 
pharmacological evidence is lacking.
The alteration of nicotine's dose-response 
curves for depression of spontaneous activity and antinociception was determined 
in the presence of increasing concentrations of pempidine.
Pempidine was found 
to increase the ED50 of nicotine (0.73 mg/kg) for depression of spontaneous 
activity in a dose-related manner.
At a dose of 3 mg/kg, pempidine increased 
nicotine's ED50 4.7-fold.
The maximum effect of nicotine was achieved in the 
presence of the highest dose of pempidine, suggesting competitive antagonism.
However, pempidine did decrease the maximum effect of nicotine in producing 
antinociception at doses that increased the ED50 13.7-fold which suggests a 
noncompetitive action.
The structural requirements for mecamylamine's antagonism 
of these nicotine effects was also determined in order to address the question 
of whether the antagonists are interacting at a receptor site.
The 
structure-activity relationships of the mecamylamine analogs revealed that the 
N-, 2- and 3-methyl groups were important for optimal potency.
Optical isomerism 
was found to have little effect on potency.
Addition of pyridinyl groups to the 
nitrogen abolished the activity of these compounds.
The structural requirements 
for the agonists and antagonists therefore appear to be quite different.
The 
alterations produced similar results for antagonism of both effects of nicotine.
Mecamylamine and pempidine therefore appear to exhibit both competitive and 
noncompetitive properties in antagonizing the central effects of nicotine.
PMID: 2366189 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Molecular mechanisms of lymphocyte extravasation. III. The loss of lymphocyte extravasation potential induced by pertussis toxin is not mediated via the activation of protein kinase C. <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>The present study evaluated whether protein kinase C (PKC) activation was involved in the lymphocytosis promoting properties of pertussis toxin (Ptx). The exposure of mouse lymphocytes to phorbol esters (as a means to selectively activate PKC) caused a depression in their subsequent capacity to localize into lymph nodes and Peyer's patches in vivo. This pattern of inhibition was quite similar to that observed with lymphocytes treated with Ptx. The mechanisms responsible for the observed decreases in localization to lymphoid organs caused by these two agents
 however, appeared to be distinct.
Exposure of lymphocytes to PMA was followed by a time and dosage-dependent decrease in the surface density of MEL-14 defined homing receptors.
Ptx-treated lymphocytes retained normal density of this homing receptor.
Consequently, PMA-treated lymphocytes lost their capacity to bind to high-endothelial venules in in vitro lymph node binding assays while Ptx-treated cells retained normal high-endothelial venule binding potential.
We conclude from this study that: 1) the activation of PKC in lymphocytes by PMA can alter their recirculation properties via mechanisms that diminish their expression of surface receptors which support extravasation into lymph node and mucosal lymphoid tissues, and 2) even though Ptx has been reported to elevate the rate of inositol phosphate turnover in lymphocytes, the loss of extravasation potential of Ptx-treated lymphocytes is not mediated via the modification of surface homing receptors as observed in cells exposed to the known PKC activator, PMA.</jats:p>
Pharmacological analysis of the CCK<sub>B</sub>/gastrin receptors mediating pentagastrin‐stimulated gastric acid secretion in the isolated stomach of the immature rat <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The CCK<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>/gastrin receptors mediating pentagastrin stimulation of gastric acid secretion by histamine release and by direct stimulation of oxyntic cells have been characterized in the immature rat isolated stomach assay. This was achieved by estimating antagonist affinity values for competitive antagonists from three distinct chemical classes (L‐365
260, PD 134,308 and JB93190) in the absence and presence of a high concentration of the histamine H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>‐receptor antagonist, famotidine (30 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>).</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Pentagastrin produced concentration‐dependent stimulation of gastric acid secretion in the absence and presence of famotidine.
Famotidine depressed the maximum secretory response to pentagastrin although the degree of depression varied between experimental replicates (25–60%).
This variation was attributed to the histamine‐release mediated component of acid secretion, as judged by the consistency of the maximum responses obtained in the presence, but not absence, of famotidine.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>All three CCK<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>/gastrin receptor antagonists behaved as surmountable antagonists in the absence and presence of famotidine.
JB93190 (p<jats:italic>K</jats:italic>∼<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>∼9.1, ∼8.9, in the absence and presence of famotidine, respectively) was approximately 30 fold more potent than either L‐365,260 (p<jats:italic>K</jats:italic><jats:sub>B</jats:sub>∼7.4, ∼7.1) or PD 134,308 (p<jats:italic>K</jats:italic><jats:sub>B</jats:sub>∼7.6, ∼7.4).</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>It was assumed that the famotidine treatment converted pentagastrin‐stimulated acid secretion from a combination of an indirect action due to the release of histamine and a direct action on the oxyntic cell to solely a direct action on the oxyntic cell.
A simple mathematical model of this two‐receptor system was developed.
The direct and indirect components were assumed to sum to produce the total response to pentagastrin obtained in the absence of famotidine.
It was found that this model could account quantitatively for the behaviour of the three antagonists without invoking a difference in antagonist affinity for the CCK<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>/gastrin receptors mediating the direct and indirect actions of pentagastrin.
However, a conclusion of receptor homogeneity has to be qualified because the model was also used to generate simulations which indicated that the analysis could only detect antagonist affinity differences of greater than one log‐unit between enterochromaffin‐like (ECL) and oxyntic cell CCK<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>/gastrin receptor populations.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
INHIBITION OF PITUITARY PROLACTIN SECRETION BY HUMAN PLACENTAL LACTOGEN IN RATS <jats:title>SUMMARY</jats:title>
        <jats:p>Intact female rats given twice daily injections of 1 mg human placental lactogen (HPL) showed continued dioestrous vaginal smears and their ovarian corpora lutea were found to be hypertrophied and functional. The serum prolactin level was significantly lower in these rats than in the controls at dioestrus as well as at pro-oestrus. Twice-daily injections of 0·5 or 2 mg HPL to ovariectomized rats decreased serum and pituitary levels of prolactin and increased hypothalamic activity of prolactin inhibiting hormone
 although the effect was less at the lower dose.
Human placental lactogen had no direct effect on pituitary prolactin secretion <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic>.
These findings have demonstrated that HPL, like prolactin itself, inhibits prolactin secretion by acting indirectly on the pituitary through the hypothalamus.</jats:p>
Developmental Inhibitory Gate Controls the Relay of Activity to the Superficial Layers of the Visual Cortex 1. J Neurosci. 2001 Sep 1;21(17):6791-801. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-17-06791.2001.

Developmental inhibitory gate controls the relay of activity to the superficial 
layers of the visual cortex.

Rozas C(1)
 Frank H, Heynen AJ, Morales B, Bear MF, Kirkwood A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Howard Hughes Medical Institute, Brown 
University, Providence, Rhode Island 02912, USA.
A developmental reduction in the radial transmission of synaptic activity has 
been proposed to underlie the end of the critical period for 
experience-dependent modification in layers II/III of the visual cortex.
Using 
paired-pulse stimulation, we investigated in visual cortical slices how the 
propagation of synaptic activity to the superficial layers changes during 
development and how this process is affected by sensory experience.
The results 
can be summarized as follows.
(1) Layers II/III responses to repetitive 
stimulation of the white matter become increasingly depressed between the third 
and sixth week of postnatal development, a time course that parallels the end of 
the critical period.
(2) Paired-pulse depression is reduced after dark rearing 
and also by blocking inhibitory synaptic transmission.
(3) Paired-pulse 
depression and its regulation by age and sensory experience is more pronounced 
when stimulation is applied to the white matter than when applied to layer IV.
Together, these results are consistent with the idea that the maturation of 
intracortical inhibition reduces the capability of the cortex to relay incoming 
high-frequency patterns of activity to the supragranular layers.
DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.21-17-06791.2001
PMCID: PMC6763109
PMID: 11517267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of antidepressant drugs on the HPA axis activity
 glucocorticoid receptor level and FKBP51 concentration in prenatally stressed rats 1.
Psychoneuroendocrinology.
2009 Jul;34(6):822-32. doi: 
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.12.012.
Epub 2009 Feb 5.
The effect of antidepressant drugs on the HPA axis activity, glucocorticoid 
receptor level and FKBP51 concentration in prenatally stressed rats.
Szymańska M(1), Budziszewska B, Jaworska-Feil L, Basta-Kaim A, Kubera M, 
Leśkiewicz M, Regulska M, Lasoń W.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Neuroendocrinology, Institute of Pharmacology, 
Polish Academy of Sciences, 31-343 Kraków, Smetna 12, Poland.
Dysregulation of hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis activity is thought 
to be an important factor in pathogenesis of depression.
In animals, stress or 
glucocorticoids given in prenatal period lead to long-lasting behavioral and 
neuroendocrine changes similar to those observed in depressed patients.
However, 
molecular basis for HPA disturbances in animals exposed to prenatal stress - a 
model of depression - have been only partially recognized.
Therefore, in the 
present study we investigated the effect of prenatal stress on behavioral 
changes, blood corticosterone level, concentrations of glucocorticoid receptor 
(GR) and its cochaperone, FKBP51, in the hippocampus and frontal cortex in adult 
rats.
It has been found that prenatally stressed rats display high level of 
immobility in the Porsolt test and anxiety-like behavior.
The HPA axis 
hyperactivity in theses animals was evidenced by corticosterone hypersecretion 
at the end of the light phase and 1h following acute stress.
Western blot study 
revealed that GR level was significantly elevated in the hippocampus but not in 
the frontal cortex of prenatally stressed rats, whereas concentration of FKBP51 
was decreased only in the former brain structure.
Chronic treatment with 
imipramine, fluoxetine, mirtazapine and tianeptine have diminished both 
behavioral and biochemical alterations observed in this animal model of 
depression.
These data indicate that the increase in hippocampal GR level and 
low concentration of FKBP51 in the frontal cortex may be responsible for 
enhanced glucocorticoid action in depression.
DOI: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2008.12.012
PMID: 19195790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Opioid-Induced Long-Term Potentiation in the Spinal Cord Is a Presynaptic Event <jats:p>Opioids remain the mainstay of treatment for severe pain
 but the associated hyperalgesia and tolerance are significant impediments to achieving adequate pain relief with opioids.
Here we show that in the spinal cord, brief application of the μ-opioid receptor agonist (D-Ala<jats:sup>2</jats:sup>,N-Me-Phe<jats:sup>4</jats:sup>,Gly-ol<jats:sup>5</jats:sup>)-enkephalin (DAMGO) at 1 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>, but not at 1–10 n<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>, caused an initial decrease followed by a large and long-lasting increase in the amplitude of monosynaptic EPSCs evoked from the dorsal root in ∼50% of lamina I and II neurons.
However, postsynaptic dialysis of the G-protein inhibitor had no effect on DAMGO-induced initial inhibition and long-term potentiation (LTP) in either lamina I or II neurons.
DAMGO-induced LTP was associated with an increase in the paired-pulse depression ratio.
Furthermore, DAMGO application and washout induced an initial decrease followed by a persistent increase in the frequency of miniature EPSCs.
Bath application, but not postsynaptic dialysis, of an NMDA receptor antagonist or a calcium chelator abolished DAMGO-induced LTP.
Strikingly, ablation of TRPV1-expressing primary afferents not only eliminated DAMGO-induced LTP but also prolonged DAMGO-induced inhibition of the miniature and evoked EPSCs (i.e., long-term depression).
Thus, our study strongly suggests that TRPV1-expressing primary afferents play a prominent role in opioid-induced presynaptic LTP, which challenges a previous report suggesting the postsynaptic nature of this opioid-induced LTP.
This excitatory effect of opioids on primary afferents can counteract the inhibitory effect of opioids on synaptic transmission at the spinal level and is likely involved in opioid-induced hyperalgesia and tolerance.</jats:p>
The influence of pulsed magnetic fields (PMFs) on nonsynaptic potentials recorded from the central and peripheral nervous systems in vitro <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The influence of pulsed magnetic fields (PMFs) on nonsynaptic potentials recorded from the central and peripheral nervous system in vitro has been investigated. The population spikes (PSs) recorded from hippocampal slices during antidromic stimulation and compound action potentials (CAPs) recorded from the segments of the sciatic nerve were used as indicators of neuronal activity. The potentials recorded from both preparations were significantly and permanently enhanced following PMF (0.16 Hz
 15 mT) exposure.
The increase in the antidromic PS occurred even in the presence of potassium channel blocker tetraethylammonium (TEA) and was accompanied by multiple spiking.
Among all frequencies of PMF tested (0.5, 0.16, 0.07, 0.03, 0.0 Hz), the frequency of 0.5 Hz was the most effective in enhancement of potential amplitude.
The influence of PMF on the amplitude of two CAPs evoked by the pair of electrical stimuli applied in rapid succession has also been evaluated.
In control conditions the potential triggered by the second stimuli was slightly smaller expressing the phenomenon of short‐term depression (STD).
Although PMF exposure amplified the amplitude of both potentials, the increase in the size of the first potential was significantly greater increasing further the magnitude of STD.
The blocking of potassium channels reversed STD into facilitation.
One of the possible mechanisms involved in PMF action could be the modification of the axonal threshold, which was significantly reduced following exposure to PMF.
Bioelectromagnetics 30:621–630, 2009.
© 2009 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
Response of upper airway and chest wall muscles to selective brain stem hypoxia in the newborn <jats:p> In animals with intact peripheral chemosensory afferents
 hypoxia differentially affects upper airway (UA) and chest wall muscles.
To determine the contribution of brain stem (BS) hypoxia to the response of UA and chest wall muscles during early life, we perfused the BS through a vertebral artery intermittently with blood from an extracorporeal circuit in nine newborn piglets (age 1–5 days).
BS perfusions were performed with hypoxemic blood (arterial PO2 32 +/- 6 to 38 +/- 8 Torr) with different levels of BS PCO2 (28 +/- 2, 37 +/- 4, and 56 +/- 5 Torr) while systemic normocapnic hyperoxia was maintained (arterial PCO2 36 +/- 3 to 40 +/- 6 Torr, arterial PO2 345 +/- 73 to 392 +/- 37 Torr).
Electromyograms (EMGs) of alae nasi (AN), external intercostal (EI), and diaphragm (DIA) were recorded.
Normocapnic hypoxia of the BS induced a sustained increase in AN EMG (P &lt; 0.01, analysis of variance) and depression of EI and DIA EMGs without a transient increase.
These contrasting responses were also observed during hypocapnic and hypercapnic hypoxia of the BS and were not affected by inputs from the peripheral chemoreceptors or rostral cerebral structures that were not exposed to hypoxia.
We conclude that, despite eliciting the known central respiratory depression, BS hypoxia causes an increase in the respiratory drive to an UA airway muscle.
Thus, BS hypoxia elicits a selective rather than a generalized respiratory muscle depression.
The respiratory muscles with high energy expenditure (DIA and EI) are depressed while UA muscles are stimulated or disinhibited.
This response is independent of the level of BS arterial PCO2.
</jats:p>
Reactive oxygen species potentiate the negative inotropic effect of cardiac M 2 -muscarinic receptor stimulation 1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2001 Aug;364(2):166-71. doi: 
10.1007/s002100100442.

Reactive oxygen species potentiate the negative inotropic effect of cardiac 
M2-muscarinic receptor stimulation.

Peters SL(1)
 Sand C, Batinik HD, Pfaffendorf M, van Zwieten PA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacotherapy, Academic Medical Center, University of 
Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
s.l.peters@amc.uva.nl

The aim of the present study was to investigate the influence of reactive oxygen 
species (ROS) on the contractile responses of rat isolated left atria to 
muscarinic receptor stimulation.
ROS were generated by means of electrolysis (30 
mA, 75 s) of the organ bath fluid.
Twenty minutes after the electrolysis period, 
the electrically paced atria (3 Hz) were stimulated with the adenylyl cyclase 
activator forskolin (1 microM).
Subsequently, cumulative acetylcholine 
concentration-response curves were constructed (0.01 nM-10 microM).
In addition, 
phosphoinositide turnover and adenylyl cyclase activity under basal and 
stimulated conditions were measured.
For these biochemical experiments we used 
the stable acetylcholine analogue carbachol.
The atria exposed to reactive 
oxygen species were influenced more potently (pD2 control: 6.2 vs. 7.1 for 
electrolysis-treated atria, P<0.05) and more effectively (Emax control: 40% vs. 
90% reduction of the initial amplitude, P<0.05) by acetylcholine.
In contrast, 
ROS exposure did not alter the responses to adenosine, whose receptor is also 
coupled via a Gi-protein to adenylyl cyclase.
The basal (40% vs. control, 
P<0.05) as well as the carbachol-stimulated (-85% vs. control, P<0.05) 
inositol-phosphate formation was reduced in atria exposed to ROS.
The 
forskolin-stimulated adenylyl cyclase activity was identical in both groups but 
carbachol stimulation induced a more pronounced reduction in adenylyl cyclase 
activity in the electrolysis-treated atria.
Accordingly we may conclude that ROS 
enhance the negative inotropic response of isolated rat atria to acetylcholine 
by both a reduction of the positive (inositide turnover) and increase of the 
negative (adenylyl cyclase inhibition) inotropic components of cardiac 
muscarinic receptor stimulation.
This phenomenon is most likely M2-receptor 
specific, since the negative inotropic response to adenosine is unaltered by ROS 
exposure.
DOI: 10.1007/s002100100442
PMID: 11534856 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Bidirectional Homeostatic Regulation of a Depression-Related Brain State by Gamma-Aminobutyric Acidergic Deficits and Ketamine Treatment 1. Biol Psychiatry. 2016 Sep 15;80(6):457-468. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.02.009.  Epub 2016 Feb 13.

Bidirectional Homeostatic Regulation of a Depression-Related Brain State by 
Gamma-Aminobutyric Acidergic Deficits and Ketamine Treatment.

Ren Z(1)
 Pribiag H(2), Jefferson SJ(1), Shorey M(1), Fuchs T(1), Stellwagen 
D(2), Luscher B(3).
Author information:
(1)Departments of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania.
(2)Center for Research in Neuroscience (HP, DS), McGill University, Montreal 
General Hospital, Montreal, Quebec, Canada.
(3)Departments of Biology, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania; Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Pennsylvania State University, 
University Park, Pennsylvania; Center for Molecular Investigation of 
Neurological Disorders, Pennsylvania State University, University Park, 
Pennsylvania.
Electronic address: BXL25@psu.edu.
Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry.
2016 Sep 15;80(6):416-418. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.07.005.
BACKGROUND: Major depressive disorder is increasingly recognized to involve 
functional deficits in both gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA)ergic and 
glutamatergic synaptic transmission.
To elucidate the relationship between these 
phenotypes, we used GABAA receptor γ2 subunit heterozygous (γ2(+/-)) mice, which 
we previously characterized as a model animal with construct, face, and 
predictive validity for major depressive disorder.
METHODS: To assess possible consequences of GABAergic deficits on glutamatergic 
transmission, we quantitated the cell surface expression of N-methyl-D-aspartate 
(NMDA)-type and alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid 
(AMPA)-type glutamate receptors and the function of synapses in the hippocampus 
and medial prefrontal cortex of γ2(+/-) mice.
We also analyzed the effects of an 
acute dose of the experimental antidepressant ketamine on all these parameters 
in γ2(+/-) versus wild-type mice.
RESULTS: Modest defects in GABAergic synaptic transmission of γ2(+/-) mice 
resulted in a strikingly prominent homeostatic-like reduction in the cell 
surface expression of NMDA-type and AMPA-type glutamate receptors, along with 
prominent functional impairment of glutamatergic synapses in the hippocampus and 
medial prefrontal cortex.
A single subanesthetic dose of ketamine normalized 
glutamate receptor expression and synaptic function of γ2(+/-) mice to wild-type 
levels for a prolonged period, along with antidepressant-like behavioral 
consequences selectively in γ2(+/-) mice.
The GABAergic synapses of γ2(+/-) mice 
were potentiated by ketamine in parallel but only in the medial prefrontal 
cortex.
CONCLUSIONS: Depressive-like brain states that are caused by GABAergic deficits 
involve a homeostatic-like reduction of glutamatergic transmission that is 
reversible by an acute, subanesthetic dose of ketamine, along with regionally 
selective potentiation of GABAergic synapses.
The data merge the GABAergic and 
glutamatergic deficit hypotheses of major depressive disorder.
Copyright © 2016 Society of Biological Psychiatry.
Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2016.02.009
PMCID: PMC4983262
PMID: 27062563 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Galactosamine hepatotoxicity: Effect of galactosamine on glutathione resynthesis in rat primary hepatocyte cultures 1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1992 Aug;115(2):234-40. doi: 
10.1016/0041-008x(92)90328-p.

Galactosamine hepatotoxicity: effect of galactosamine on glutathione resynthesis 
in rat primary hepatocyte cultures.

McMillan JM(1)
 Jollow DJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental Therapeutics, 
Medical University of South Carolina, Charleston 29425.
The effect of galactosamine on the resynthesis of glutathione in rat primary 
hepatocyte cultures was investigated.
Cultured rat hepatocytes were treated with 
galactosamine (4 mM) 1.5 hr prior to concurrent with, or 1.5 hr after cell 
attachment; total cellular glutathione was then measured over time.
Addition of 
galactosamine at any of these times suppressed methionine-enhanced glutathione 
resynthesis in the cultures after a lag period of about 120 min.
The lag period 
was not due to slow uptake of galactosamine by the cultured cells, since 
cellular UTP levels fell to less than 10% of controls within 60 min, a time 
frame comparable to that observed in vivo.
Neither was the lag period a result 
of interference with cellular uptake of methionine or with conversion of 
methionine to cysteine, since the phenomenon was observed regardless of whether 
methionine or cysteine was used to promote glutathione resynthesis.
Addition of 
uridine, which protects against galactosamine hepatotoxicity in vivo by 
replenishing hepatic UTP levels, did not prevent the suppression of glutathione 
resynthesis.
The data indicate that (a) galactosamine inhibits the 
time-dependent resynthesis of glutathione in primary hepatocyte cultures, (b) a 
lag period exists for this response, and (c) this effect is not directly related 
to depletion of cellular UTP stores.
DOI: 10.1016/0041-008x(92)90328-p
PMID: 1641857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Naloxone reverses the inhibitory effects of dynorphin A on motor activity in the mouse 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1984 May;20(5):815-8. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(84)90206-5.

Naloxone reserves the inhibitory effects of dynorphin A on motor activity in the 
mouse.

Ukai M
 Yamada S, Kameyama T.

Dynorphin-(1-17) (dynorphin A) significantly reduced the linear locomotion, 
rearing and grooming behaviors in mice using a newly devised multi-dimensional 
behavioral analyser.
The behaviors inhibited by dynorphin A were 
dose-dependently antagonized by prior treatment with naloxone.
The results 
suggest that dynorphin A-induced behavioral depression is mediated via opioid 
receptors in the mouse brain.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(84)90206-5
PMID: 6146145 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of superoxide anions on the (Na + K)ATPase system in rat lung. 1. Clin Physiol Biochem. 1984;2(1):32-8.

Effects of superoxide anions on the (Na + K)ATPase system in rat lung.

Das DK
 Neogi A.

Oxygen-derived free radicals have been shown to alter endothelial cell functions 
in lung.
Enzymatically generated superoxide anions inactivated (Na + K)ATPase 
activity and caused lipid peroxidation in lung.
Superoxide dismutase or 
allopurinol, but not ATP, protected this oxy radical-mediated depression of 
ATPase activity.
PMID: 6091979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Vagotomy attenuates behavioural effects of interleukin-1 injected peripherally but not centrally 1. Neuroreport. 1996 Jun 17;7(9):1485-8. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199606170-00008.

Vagotomy attenuates behavioural effects of interleukin-1 injected peripherally 
but not centrally.

Bluthé RM(1)
 Michaud B, Kelley KW, Dantzer R.

Author information:
(1)INRA-INSERM U394, Domaine de Carriere, Bordeaux, France.
Peripheral and central injections of recombinant rat interleukin-1 beta (IL-1 
beta) have been shown to decrease social exploration in rats.
To test the 
involvement of vagal afferents in the communication between the immune system 
and the brain, sham-operated and vagotomized rats were injected peripherally or 
centrally with physiological saline or IL-1 beta 4 weeks after surgery.
Vagotomy 
attenuated the depression in social exploration induced by i.p.
administration 
of IL-1 beta (15 micrograms) but did not alter the behaviour-depressing effects 
of an intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.)
injection of IL-1 beta (45 ng).
These 
results confirm the role of vagal afferent nerves in the transmission of an 
immune message from the periphery to the brain, and show that vagotomy does not 
impair the direct sensitivity of the brain itself to immune signals.
DOI: 10.1097/00001756-199606170-00008
PMID: 8856703 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
MODIFICATIONS BY PROPRANOLOL OF THE RESPONSE OF ISOLATED RABBIT ATRIA TO ENDOGENOUS AND EXOGENOUS NORADRENALINE 1. Br J Pharmacol Chemother. 1968 Mar;32(3):539-45. doi: 
10.1111/j.1476-5381.1968.tb00454.x.

Modifications by propranolol of the response of isolated rabbit atria to 
endogenous and exogenous noradrenaline.

Shimamoto K
 Toda N.

DOI: 10.1111/j.1476-5381.1968.tb00454.x
PMCID: PMC1570331
PMID: 5641948 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Different glutamate receptor mechanisms in long-term depression induced by different stimulus patterns in the CA1 area of adult rat hippocampus. 1. Sheng Li Xue Bao. 2008 Apr 25;60(2):270-4.

Different glutamate receptor mechanisms in long-term depression induced by 
different stimulus patterns in the CA1 area of adult rat hippocampus.

Chen L(1)
 Han TZ, Jiang ML.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pathophysiology, School of Medicine, Xi'an 
Jiaotong University, Xi'an 710061, China.
Previous reports suggested that a novel stimulus pattern of multi-train stimulus 
at low-frequency (2-Hz or 5-Hz) could induce stable long-term depression (LTD) 
in the CA1 area of adult rat hippocampus.
In the present study, in order to 
determine the mechanism in LTD induced by the two novel tetanus patterns, 
changes in the population spikes (PS) in the hippocampal CA1 area of adult rats 
following the multi-train stimulus in the presence of AP5 [antagonist of 
N-methyl-D-aspartate receptors (NMDARs)] or MCPG [antagonist of type I/II 
metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs)] were recorded.
The results showed 
that both AP5 and MCPG inhibited the LTD induced by 2-Hz multi-train stimulus.
The mean amplitude of population spikes (PSA) normalized to the baseline was 
(96.0±3.5)% after applying AP5 (n=10) and (95.7±4.1)% after applying MCPG (n=8), 
respectively, measured at 20 min post-tetanus.
While 5-Hz multi-train tetanus 
failed to induce LTD in the presence of MCPG.
The mean PSA was (73.6±4.4)% 
(n=10) and (98.2±8.9)% (n=8) in the presence of AP5 and MCPG, respectively, 
measured at 35 min post-tetanus.
So it is suggested that LTD induced by 2-Hz 
multi-train tetanus involves co-activation of NMDARs and mGluRs, while LTD 
induced by 5-Hz multi-train tetanus is only related to activation of mGluRs.
PMID: 18425317 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Endothelin-1 depresses tracheal mucus velocity in ovine airways via ET-A receptors. 1. Am J Respir Crit Care Med. 1996 Aug;154(2 Pt 1):341-5. doi: 
10.1164/ajrccm.154.2.8756804.

Endothelin-1 depresses tracheal mucus velocity in ovine airways via ET-A 
receptors.

Sabater JR(1)
 Otero R, Abraham WM, Wanner A, O'Riordan TG.
Author information:
(1)Pulmonary Division, University of Miami at Mount Sinai, Miami Beach, Florida, 
USA.
Endothelin-1 (ET-1) is a potent constrictor of bronchial smooth muscle, but 
there is limited information on its actions on the airway mucociliary clearance 
in vivo.
The purpose of this study was to determine (1) the effect of 
aerosolized ET-1 on tracheal mucus velocity (TMV), a marker of mucociliary 
clearance, in sheep and (2) if the ET-1-induced effects were mediated by ET-A or 
ET-B receptors.
To measure TMV, radiopaque teflon particles were insufflated 
into six intubated, spontaneously breathing, adult sheep, and the velocity at 
which these particles traveled up the trachea was measured using a previously 
reported roentgenographic technique.
After baseline TMV measurements, 50 breaths 
of either ET-1 (10(-7) M) or vehicle (phosphate-buffered saline) were 
aerosolized into the airways.
TMV measurements were then obtained over a 2-h 
period.
After exposure to ET-1, mean TMV decreased significantly as compared 
with vehicle, the effects being most marked within 30 min after administration 
(54%, p < 0.05).
On subsequent days, animals were pretreated with an aerosolized 
ET-A receptor antagonist (BQ-123) or an ET-B receptor antagonist (BQ-788) before 
exposure to ET-1.
When ET-1 was given after BQ-123, no significant drop in TMV 
was noted.
In contrast, pretreatment with BQ-788 exhibited no protective effect 
on the decrease in TMV.
The ET-1 effects were not influenced by pretreatment 
with either the cyclo-oxygenase inhibitor indomethacin or the leukotriene 
receptor antagonist MK-571, indicating that ET-1-induced depression in TMV does 
not involve the activation of prostanoids or peptide leukotrienes.
Thus, 
exogenous ET-1 reduces TMV, an in vivo effect that is mediated through 
stimulation of ET-A receptors.
DOI: 10.1164/ajrccm.154.2.8756804
PMID: 8756804 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Multiple sites of interaction between prostaglandins and non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents 1. Prostaglandins. 1975 Mar;9(3):349-59. doi: 10.1016/0090-6980(75)90139-2.

Multiple sites of interaction between prostaglandins and non-steroidal 
anti-inflammatory agents.

Tolman EL
 Partridge R.

Several non-steroidal anti-inflammatory agents (NSAIA) are shown to inhibit the 
net production of prostaglandin (PG)- like activity from arachidonic acid by a 
cell-free preparation of guinea-pig lung.
Moreover, these agents also antagonize 
PGE-1-induced contractions of the isolated gerbil colon.
The anti-spasmogenic 
effects are reversible and specific.
At high concentrations, indomethacin and 
mefenamic acid interfere with the binding of PGE-1 to a broken cell preparation 
of rat epididymal adipocytes.
Taken together the data indicate that NSAIA 
interact with prostaglandins at multiple sites and are consistent with the 
suggestions reported previously that NSAIA may have multiple in vivo actions.
DOI: 10.1016/0090-6980(75)90139-2
PMID: 1138291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Prenatal exposure to escitalopram and/or stress in rats produces limited effects on endocrine
 behavioral, or gene expression measures in adult male rats 1.
Neurotoxicol Teratol.
2013 Sep-Oct;39:100-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ntt.2013.07.008.
Epub 2013 Jul 30.
Prenatal exposure to escitalopram and/or stress in rats produces limited effects 
on endocrine, behavioral, or gene expression measures in adult male rats.
Bourke CH(1), Stowe ZN, Neigh GN, Olson DE, Owens MJ.
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neuropsychopharmacology, Department of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences, Emory University, Atlanta, GA, USA.
Stress and/or antidepressants during pregnancy have been implicated in a wide 
range of long-term effects in the offspring.
We investigated the long-term 
effects of prenatal stress and/or clinically relevant antidepressant exposure on 
male adult offspring in a model of the pharmacotherapy of maternal depression.
Female Sprague-Dawley rats were implanted with osmotic minipumps that delivered 
clinically relevant exposure to the antidepressant escitalopram throughout 
gestation.
Subsequently, pregnant females were exposed on gestational days 10-20 
to a chronic unpredictable mild stress paradigm.
The male offspring were 
analyzed in adulthood.
Baseline physiological measurements were largely 
unaltered by prenatal manipulations.
Behavioral characterization of the male 
offspring, with or without pre-exposure to an acute stressor, did not reveal any 
group differences.
Prenatal stress exposure resulted in a faster return towards 
baseline following the peak response to an acute restraint stressor, but not an 
airpuff startle stressor, in adulthood.
Microarray analysis of the hippocampus 
and hypothalamus comparing all treatment groups revealed no 
significantly-altered transcripts.
Real time PCR of the hippocampus confirmed 
that several transcripts in the CRFergic, serotonergic, and neural plasticity 
pathways were unaffected by prenatal exposures.
This stress model of maternal 
depression and its treatment indicate that escitalopram use and/or stress during 
pregnancy produced no alterations in our measures of male adult behavior or the 
transcriptome, however prenatal stress exposure resulted in some evidence for 
increased glucocorticoid negative feedback following an acute restraint stress.
Study design should be carefully considered before implications for human health 
are ascribed to prenatal exposure to stress or antidepressant medication.
© 2013.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ntt.2013.07.008
PMCID: PMC3795959
PMID: 23906943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement CHB and DEO have 
no conflicts to disclose.
ZNS has received research support from NIH, GSK, 
Pfizer and Wyeth, has served on speakers or advisory boards for Pfizer, Eli 
Lilly, Wyeth, BMS, and GSK, and has received honoraria from Eli Lilly, GSK, 
Pfizer, and Wyeth.
GNN receives grant funding from NIMH, AHA, NARSAD, GSK, and 
Emory University.
MJO has research grants from NIH, Eli Lilly, Lundbeck A/S, 
Cyberonics, Ortho-McNeil Janssen, AstraZeneca, Dainippon Sumitomo Pharma, 
Sunovion, and SK Life Sciences.
He is a consultant for Takeda and RJ Reynolds.
He receives consulting payments from H. Lundbeck A/S >$5,000 annually.
This 
financial interest has been reviewed and is managed.
He has a patent entitled: 
“Method of assessing antidepressant drug therapy via transport inhibition of 
monoamine neurotransmitters” (US 7,148,027 B2).
Antidepressant-like effects of salidroside on olfactory bulbectomy-induced pro-inflammatory cytokine production and hyperactivity of HPA axis in rats 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2014 Sep;124:451-7. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2014.07.015. 
Epub 2014 Aug 4.

Antidepressant-like effects of salidroside on olfactory bulbectomy-induced 
pro-inflammatory cytokine production and hyperactivity of HPA axis in rats.

Yang SJ(1)
 Yu HY(1), Kang DY(1), Ma ZQ(1), Qu R(2), Fu Q(3), Ma SP(4).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing 210009, PR China.
(2)Discipline of Chinese and Western Integrative Medicine, Nanjing University of 
Chinese Medicine, Nanjing 210046, PR China.
(3)Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing 210009, PR China.
Electronic address: fuqiang@cpu.edu.cn.
(4)Department of Pharmacology of Chinese Materia Medica, China Pharmaceutical 
University, Nanjing 210009, PR China.
Electronic address: spma@cpu.edu.cn.
Salidroside (SA) is the primary bioactive marker compound in the standardized 
extracts from Rhodiola rosea.
Although it has potential antidepressant activity 
in a rat behavioral despair model, the mechanisms of antidepressant effect for 
SA remain unclear.
The objective of this study was to evaluate the 
antidepressant effects of SA and to discuss the potential mechanisms in 
olfactory bulbectomized (OBX) rats.
SA of 20, 40 mg/kg (p.o.)
for 2 weeks 
notably alleviated OBX-induced hyperactivity in open field test, decreased 
immobility time in TST and FST.
Chronic treatment with SA could remarkably 
reduce TNF-α and IL-1β levels in hippocampus.
Western blot showed that SA could 
markedly increase glucocorticoid receptor (GR) and brain-derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) expression in the hippocampus.
Besides, SA could also attenuate 
corticotropin-releasing hormone (CRH) expression in hypothalamus, as well as 
reducing significantly the levels of serum corticosterone.
In conclusion, this 
study demonstrated that OBX rats treated with SA could significantly improve the 
depressive-like behaviors.
The antidepressant mechanisms of SA might be 
associated with its anti-inflammatory effects and the regulation of HPA axis 
activity.
Reversal of abnormalities of GR may be partly responsible for those 
effects.
These findings suggested that SA might become a beneficial agent to 
prevent and treat the depression.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2014.07.015
PMID: 25101546 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cardiodynamics in the rhesus macaque during dissociative anesthesia. 1. Am J Vet Res. 1982 Apr;43(4):671-5.

Cardiodynamics in the rhesus macaque during dissociative anesthesia.

Booker JL Jr
 Erickson HH, Fitzpatrick EL.
Effects of dissociative anesthesia on cardiovascular dynamics and respiration 
were investigated in rhesus macaques to determine its use in nonhuman primates 
for restraint and minor surgical procedures.
Respiration was spontaneous, and 
premedicants or anesthetic adjuvants were not used.
Two doses of the anesthetic 
were administered (IM): 1.5 and 3.0 mg/kg.
Depressant effects were observed in 
all variables initially; some cardiovascular variables eventually exceeded 
preinjection values after the higher (3.0 mg/kg) dose level.
At a dose of 1.5 
mg/kg, significant depression in myocardial contractility persisted for 20 
minutes, and at 3.0 mg/kg for 50 minutes.
Stroke volume was minimally affected 
initially, although significant increases occurred at 40 and 50 minutes after 
the 3.0 mg/kg injections.
Heart rate was depressed by 5% and 7% in the animals 
given the small and large doses.
Values were within control levels by 90 minutes 
after the anesthetic was injected, except respiratory rate and body temperature.
We conclude that the dissociative anesthetic used produces neither marked nor 
prolonged cardiovascular effects.
Since cardiovascular effects are absent by 90 
minutes after the anesthetic was injected, dissociative anesthesia is a 
desirable technique for minor surgical procedures and restraint, especially 
before physiologic studies.
PMID: 7073088 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Kontrazeptive Wirkung von Cadmium bei Legehennen 1. Naturwissenschaften. 1968 Nov;55(11):551. doi: 10.1007/BF00660149.

[Contraceptive action of cadmium in laying hens].

[Article in German]

Hennig A
 Hartmann G, Gruhn K, Anke M.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00660149
PMID: 5704510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Rapid analysis of β-phenylethylamine in tissues and body fluids utilizing pentafluorobenzoylation followed by electron-capture gas chromatography 1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 1987;11(2-3):251-8. doi: 
10.1016/0278-5846(87)90068-6.

Rapid analysis of beta-phenylethylamine in tissues and body fluids utilizing 
pentafluorobenzoylation followed by electron-capture gas chromatography.

Nazarali AJ
 Baker GB, Coutts RT, Yeung JM, Rao TS.
A rapid, sensitive gas chromatographic procedure for analysis of 
beta-phenylethylamine is reported.
The procedure involves extraction with a 
liquid ion-pairing compound, back-extraction with HCl, basification and reaction 
with pentafluorobenzoyl chloride under aqueous conditions.
The 
pentafluorobenzoyl derivative of beta-phenylethylamine is then separated and 
analyzed on a gas chromatograph equipped with a capillary column and an 
electron-capture detector.
The procedure produces a derivative which has good 
chromatographic properties and a high degree of stability.
The method has been 
applied to analysis of beta-phenylethylamine in a variety of tissues and body 
fluids.
DOI: 10.1016/0278-5846(87)90068-6
PMID: 3628832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ro 15-1788 both antagonizes and potentiates adenosine-evoked depression of cerebral cortical neurons 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1987 Apr 14;136(2):151-6. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(87)90706-0.

Ro 15-1788 both antagonizes and potentiates adenosine-evoked depression of 
cerebral cortical neurons.

Phillis JW
 Stair RE.
The effects of Ro 15-1788, a benzodiazepine antagonist with some agonist 
properties, were studied on adenosine and adenosine 5'-N-ethyl-carboxamide 
(NECA)-evoked depressions of rat cerebral cortical neuronal activity.
Iontophoretically applied Ro 15-1788 had both antagonistic and potentiative 
interactions with adenosine.
Reductions in the magnitude of adenosine-evoked 
depressions of firing were evident during the period of Ro 15-1788 application, 
with a long-lasting potentiative effect becoming apparent upon termination of 
the Ro 15-1788 application.
Depressions of cell firing evoked by NECA, an 
uptake-resistant analog of adenosine, were antagonized by Ro 15-1788, with no 
subsequent potentiation.
Larger applications of Ro 15-1788 had a depressant 
action on neuronal firing, which was antagonized by caffeine (20 mg/kg), an 
adenosine receptor blocker.
These results indicate that Ro 15-1788 may be an 
antagonist at the adenosine receptor as well as a potentiator of the adenosine 
response.
The prolongation of the adenosine depression is likely to be the 
result of a persistent inhibition of adenosine uptake by Ro 15-1788.
These 
diverse effects on the adenosine response may account for some of the complex 
behavioral actions of Ro 15-1788.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(87)90706-0
PMID: 3109926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Elevated Phosphorus Impedes Manganese Acquisition by Barley Plants 1. Front Plant Sci. 2011 Aug 5;2:37. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2011.00037. eCollection 
2011.

Elevated phosphorus impedes manganese acquisition by barley plants.

Pedas P(1)
 Husted S, Skytte K, Schjoerring JK.
Author information:
(1)Plant and Soil Science Section, Department of Agriculture and Ecology, 
Faculty of Life Sciences, University of Copenhagen Frederiksberg C, Copenhagen, 
Denmark.
The occurrence of manganese (Mn) deficiency in cereal crops has increased in 
recent years.
This coincides with increasing phosphorus (P) status of many soils 
due to application of high levels of animal manure and P-fertilizers.
In order 
to test the hypothesis that elevated P my lead to Mn deficiency we have here 
conducted a series of hydroponics and soil experiments examining how the P 
supply affects the Mn nutrition of barley.
Evidence for a direct negative 
interaction between P and Mn during root uptake was obtained by on-line 
inductively coupled plasma mass spectrometry (ICP-MS).
Addition of a pulse of 
KH(2)PO(4) rapidly and significantly reduced root Mn uptake, while a similar 
concentration of KCl had no effect.
Addition of a P pulse to the same nutrient 
solution without plants did not affect the concentration of Mn, revealing that 
no precipitation of Mn-P species was occurring.
Barley plants growing at a high 
P supply in hydroponics with continuous replenishment of Mn(2+) had up to 50% 
lower Mn concentration in the youngest leaves than P limited plants.
This 
P-induced depression of foliar Mn accelerated the development of Mn deficiency 
as evidenced by a marked change in the fluorescence induction kinetics of 
chlorophyll a.
Also plants growing in soil exhibited lower leaf Mn 
concentrations in response to elevated P. In contrast, leaf concentrations of 
Fe, Cu, and N increased with the P supply, supporting that the negative effect 
of P on Mn acquisition was specific rather than due to a general dilution 
effect.
It is concluded that elevated P supply directly interferes with Mn 
uptake in barley roots and that this negative interaction can induce Mn 
deficiency in the shoot.
This finding has major implications in commercial plant 
production where many soils have high P levels.
DOI: 10.3389/fpls.2011.00037
PMCID: PMC3355622
PMID: 22639592
Inbreeding and Relatedness in Scandinavian Grey Wolves Canis Lupus 1. Hereditas. 1999;130(3):239-44. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-5223.1999.00239.x.

Inbreeding and relatedness in Scandinavian grey wolves Canis lupus.

Ellegren H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Evolutionary Biology
 Uppsala University, Sweden.
hans.ellegren@evolution.uu.se

Management of small and threatened populations may require detailed knowledge 
about the genetic status of individuals and the genetic relatedness between 
individuals.
I show here that individual heterozygosity at a set of 29 
microsatellite loci correlates closely to the degree of inbreeding in a captive 
grey wolf population.
Microsatellite allele sharing similarly correlates closely 
to known relatedness between pairs of individuals.
Genotyping the same markers 
in a small (60-70 individuals) natural population of grey wolves in Sweden, low 
individual heterozygosities and high values of allele sharing between some 
animals were found.
Since inbreeding depression has been documented in a captive 
grey wolf population of Scandinavian origin, the results point out an additional 
risk for the small Swedish wild population.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-5223.1999.00239.x
PMID: 10509138 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Comparative Studies between Portuguese and Japanese Isolates of the Pinewood Nematode
 Bursaphelenchus xylophilus.
1.
J Nematol.
2006 Dec;38(4):429-33.
Comparative Studies between Portuguese and Japanese Isolates of the Pinewood 
Nematode, Bursaphelenchus xylophilus.
Mota MM(1), Takemoto S, Takeuchi Y, Hara N, Futai K.

Author information:
(1)NemaLab-ICAM, Dept.
de Biologia, Universidade de Evora, 7002-554 Evora, 
Portugal Laboratory of Environmental Mycoscience, Graduate School of 
Agriculture, Kyoto University, Sakyo-ku, Kyoto, 606-8502, Japan.
Comparative studies between Portuguese (T and HF) and Japanese (S10, T4, C14-5 
and OKD-1) isolates of the pinewood nematode Bursaphelenchus xylophilus have 
been made in order to provide information to better understand the possible 
origin of the Portuguese isolates, recently introduced in the European Union.
The main comparative aspects investigated were pathogenicity (seedling mortality 
ratio), sexual compatibility, and DNA sequences of the rDNA region.
Four-year-old Japanese black pine (Pinus thunbergii) seedlings were used as host 
plants for pathogenicity tests.
The Portuguese isolates, and in particular 
isolate "T," propagated in higher numbers than the Japanese isolates within pine 
seedlings.
All combinations of crossings produced viable progeny, with higher 
numbers obtained when crossings were made between Japanese and Portuguese 
isolates, a possible situation of heterosis and/or inbreeding depression.
Reciprocal crossings yielded different values, which may reflect a sex effect 
(maternal inheritance, mtDNA).
Regarding DNA sequencing, both Portuguese 
isolates displayed nearly identical ITS 1, ITS2, and 5.8S rDNA base sequences as 
the Japanese isolates.
Although biologically very similar, and possibly 
reflecting a common origin, the Portuguese isolates may present a serious threat 
to Japanese black pine, due to their higher virulence.
PMCID: PMC2586472
PMID: 19259459
[Cytochrome P-450 content and activity of NADPH-cytochrome P-450 c-reductase in experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage]. 1. Lik Sprava. 2001 May-Jun;(3):114-5.

[Cytochrome P-450 content and activity of NADPH-cytochrome P-450 c-reductase in 
experimental subarachnoid hemorrhage].

[Article in Russian]

Makhkamov KE.

The condition was studied of the brain monooxigenase system (MOS) in 
experimental subarachnoidal hemorrhage in rats. The results show that the above 
hemorrhage leads to a significant depression of activity of brain MOS enzymes 
(cytochrome P-450
 NADPN-cytochrome C-reductase).
Depression of activity of the 
enzymic system is manifest from day 1 and has a tendency toward reduction but at 
day 14 and 21 the indices are still below the control values.
Under the exposure 
to phenobarbital the reduction of activity of the enzyme system in 
subarachnoidal hemorrhage gets accelerated, with normalization of the indices 
occurring by day 7 after the hemorrhage.
PMID: 11559996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibitory effect of diamidinophenylindole on the replication of influenza virus in permissive cellular hosts 1. Arch Virol. 1987;94(1-2):149-57. doi: 10.1007/BF01313733.

Inhibitory effect of diamidinophenylindole on the replication of influenza virus 
in permissive cellular hosts. Brief report.

Conti G
 Portincasa P.

The production of avian and human strains of influenza virus was altered to 
various extents by treatment of various host cells with 40 micrograms/ml of 
diamidinophenylindole (DAPI).
In infected LLC-MK 2 cells only an abortive 
replication cycle occurred; in other cell lines there was partial inhibition or 
no inhibition of replication.
Virus polypeptide synthesis in LLC-MK 2 cells was 
confined to the early pattern of viral multiplication; only the P proteins, the 
nucleoprotein NP, and the non-structural protein NS 1 were synthesized.
The 
stage of replication mainly affected by DAPI was between the fourth and the 
sixth hour after infection.
The mode of action of the drug and its modulating 
effect on virus production is discussed.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01313733
PMID: 3579606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Natural immune response and immunological memory in the effects of a 2d unrelated antigen]. 1. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol. 1975 Dec;(12):106-11.

[Natural immune response and immunological memory in the effects of a 2d 
unrelated antigen].

[Article in Russian]

Karasik OA
 Nazarov PG.
In combined administration of two nonaffiliated erythrocytic antigens there can 
be seen both depression and stimulation of the immunological response to the 
participating antigens.
The end result of the interaction depended on the 
"power", the dose and the order of administration of the antigens.
Distribution 
of the antigen in the animals whose immune response was depressed as a result of 
preliminary administration of the nonaffiliated antigen remained unchanged.
The 
factor determining the effect on the immunological response to the other antigen 
did not serve as an antibody.
PMID: 1082695 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Relationships between hypocalcaemic and anorectic effect of calcitonin in the rat 1. Pharmacol Res Commun. 1985 Mar;17(3):209-15. doi:
10.1016/0031-6989(85)90095-5.

Relationships between hypocalcaemic and anorectic effect of calcitonin in the 
rat.

Gaggi R
 Beltrandi E, Dall'Olio R, Ferri S.

Salmon calcitonin (sCT, 2 and 20 U/kg), porcine calcitonin (pCT, 20 and 40 U/kg) 
and human calcitonin (hCT, 20 and 40 U/kg) were injected subcutaneously to rats 
trained to eat their food during two hours each day.
Food intake and serum Ca++ 
concentrations were determined at the end of 2h-feeding period.
A long lasting 
anorectic effect was observed for 20 U/kg of sCT with a parallelism between 
hypocalcaemia and anorexia in the first 8 hours after treatment; on the 
contrary, rats continued to eat less than controls in the following hours when 
their serum Ca++ concentrations had risen to normal or even higher levels.
As 
regards pCT and hCT, it was shown that these peptides reduced significantly meal 
size only for 1-2 hours when serum Ca++ levels were at their lowest levels for 
these peptides.
DOI: 10.1016/0031-6989(85)90095-5
PMID: 4011645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Heparin pretreatment suppresses norepinephrine concentrations in dogs in endotoxic shock. <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>Mongrel dogs were treated intravenously with either 1000 units of beef-lung heparin per kilogram of body weight or with isotonic saline
 before intravenous administration of E. coli endotoxin.
We found significant differences in circulating norepinephrine concentrations between a heparin-pretreatment group (1.89 +/- 0.39 microgram/liter) and the control group (9.83 +/- 4.64 microgram/liter), but none with respect to epinephrine.
Systolic blood pressures at 360 min were also significantly (P less than 0.05) different, 148 +/- 6 mmHg as compared with 118 +/- 13.4 mmHg.
Evidently heparin pretreatment can decrease circulating norepinephrine concentrations in the endotoxic state and changes in circulating catecholamine concentrations can affect physiological variables.</jats:p>
The proliferative responses of lymphocytes from foetal calves and adult cattle 1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1997 Oct 6;59(1-2):49-64. doi: 
10.1016/s0165-2427(97)00057-3.

The proliferative responses of lymphocytes from foetal calves and adult cattle.

Tierney TJ(1)
 Simpson-Morgan MW.
Author information:
(1)John Curtin School of Medical Research, Australian National University, 
Canberra, Australia.
tierneyt@dpi.qld.gov.au

This paper describes the proliferative responses of prescapular lymph 
lymphocytes and peripheral blood lymphocytes of foetal calves compared with 
cells of similar origin from adult cattle.
Lymph lymphocytes were collected 
continuously by means of cannulation of efferent lymphatic ducts of the 
prescapular lymph node of foetal calves and adult cattle.
Peripheral blood 
lymphocytes were collected from the foetus by means of cannulation of 
superficial veins of the foetus or of the umbilical vessels and from the jugular 
vein of adults.
Foetal lymphocytes in one-way mixed lymphocyte culture 
stimulated and responded as well as adult lymphocytes.
Foetal cells stimulated 
and responded more to cells from unrelated animals than to cells from their dam.
Lymph lymphocytes from foetal calves between 188 and 253 days of gestation 
proliferated as well as adult lymphocytes and at a high level after stimulation 
with concanavalin A, phytohaemagglutinin and pokeweed mitogen.
Response to 
stimulation with lipopolysaccharide, soybean agglutinin and wheat-germ 
agglutinin was variable but generally low and within the same range recorded by 
adult cells.
Proliferation by foetal and adult whole-blood cultures was on 
occasions as high as that recorded by separated lymphocytes, even though fewer 
lymphocytes were initially present in the whole-blood cultures.
Foetal lymph 
lymphocytes exhibited lower proliferative responses in autologous lymph plasma 
than in foetal calf serum or pooled foetal lymph plasma.
There was no consistent 
depression of proliferation by culture medium supplements from pregnant animals.
Rabbit serum consistently abrogated responses.
Fetuin at final concentrations of 
greater than 2.5 mg/ml significantly depressed proliferation in foetal and adult 
lymphocytes from efferent lymph and peripheral blood.
DOI: 10.1016/s0165-2427(97)00057-3
PMID: 9437825 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
An unusual effect of application of the amino acid L-arginine on cat visual cortical cells. 1. Neuroreport. 1997 Mar 3;8(4):863-6.

An unusual effect of application of the amino acid L-arginine on cat visual 
cortical cells.

Rivadulla C(1)
 Grieve KL, Rodriguez R, Martinez-Conde S, Acuña C, Cuderio J.
Author information:
(1)Department De Ciencias de la Salud I (E.U.
Fisioterapia), Universidad de La 
Coruña, Spain.
Iontophoretic application of L-arginine (L-Arg) resulted in a profound decrease 
in visually elicited and spontaneous activity in 22 of 77 (29%) cells in area 17 
of the anaesthetized/paralysed cat.
Duration was long, and cells did not recover 
pre-application activity levels, indicating permanent decline.
This effect was 
obtained without change in the extracellularly recorded wave-form, demonstrating 
that this did not result from depolarization block.
In the remaining 55 cells, 
application of L-Arg alone, at levels capable of eliciting inhibition as 
described above, was without effect.
In 29 cells, L-Arg application was able to 
reverse the effect of inhibition of nitric oxide (NO) production.
Populations of 
cells showing the depressive effect described above and those affected by NO 
modulation levels were mutually exclusive.
PMID: 9141053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype-1 is essential for motor coordination in the adult cerebellum 1. Neurosci Res. 2007 Apr;57(4):538-43. doi: 10.1016/j.neures.2006.12.014. Epub 
2007 Jan 7.

Metabotropic glutamate receptor subtype-1 is essential for motor coordination in 
the adult cerebellum.

Nakao H(1)
 Nakao K, Kano M, Aiba A.
Author information:
(1)Division of Cell Biology, Department of Molecular and Cellular Biology, Kobe 
University Graduate School of Medicine, 7-5-1 Kusunoki-cho, Chuo-ku, Kobe 
650-0017, Japan.
We previously demonstrated that metabotropic glutamate receptor-subtype 1 
knockout [mGluR1 (-/-)] mice showed ataxic gait, deficient long-term depression 
and impaired synapse elimination and these phenotypes were rescued by 
introduction of an mGluR1 transgene with Purkinje cell-specific promoter 
(mGluR1-rescue mice).
However, roles of mGluR1 in the adult brain remain 
elusive, mainly due to lack of conventional and reproducible method to block 
mGluR1 expression at a certain developmental stage.
Here, we established a 
versatile mouse line, mGluR1 conditional knockout (cKO) mice using the 
tetracycline-controlled gene expression system to understand the roles of mGluR1 
in the adult brain.
The mGluR1 cKO mice express mGluR1 only in Purkinje cells 
and show normal motor coordination.
Blockade of expression of mGluR1 in the 
adult mGluR1 cKO mice led to impaired motor coordination, suggesting that mGluR1 
is essential for cerebellar function in mice not only during postnatal 
development but also in adulthood.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neures.2006.12.014
PMID: 17270300 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Gene expression patterns in a rodent model for depression <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Disturbances in sleep are encountered in the majority of patients with depression. To elucidate the possible molecular mechanisms behind this relationship we examined gene expression changes in a rodent model for depression and disturbed sleep. Animals were treated with daily injections of clomipramine in their early infancy
 after which gene expression in basal forebrain was examined using Affymetrix Rat 230.2 chips.
We tested the levels of both single transcripts and involved pathways, and searched for common nominators (i.e.
transcription factors) that could explain these changes.
We identified 72 differentially expressed gene transcripts, many of which are involved in epigenetic regulation, such as <jats:italic>DNMT2</jats:italic>.
Analysis of functional pathways revealed statistically significant changes of the biological process of synaptic transmission, the cellular compartment of the synapse and the molecular function of GABA signalling, showing that transcripts with altered expression are functionally related.
Finally, promoter analysis of the differentially expressed genes showed a clear enrichment of binding sites for the transcription factor CREB1, a molecule also involved in epigenetic regulation (cAMP response element‐binding protein induces histone modifications).
These results indicate that CREB1 may constitute one of the major links between disturbed sleep and mood.
The results also highlight the molecular mechanisms in the murine clomipramine model, previously shown to be a valid model for depression.</jats:p>
Spleen and lymph node changes in rats irradiated with X-rays and treated with testosterone. 1. Morphol Embryol (Bucur). 1979 Apr-Jun;25(2):163-6.

Spleen and lymph node changes in rats irradiated with X-rays and treated with 
testosterone.

Papilian VV
 Carpen E, Mureşan D, Olinic A, Gocan ME, Radu-Toader M.

The authors have studied the effect of testosterone administration in male adult 
Wistar rats irradiated with a single total dose of 800 r X-rays.
The results 
obtained show that testosterone exerts a double radioprotective action.
This 
hormone prevents both the occurrence of the senile type spleen and lymph node 
changes and the depression of the colloidopexic capacity of the hepatosplenic 
macrophages.
At the same time, these results suggest that testosterone induces 
hyperplasia of the lymphocytic elements, particularly of T lymphocytes.
PMID: 158136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
BACE1 Knock-Outs Display Deficits in Activity-Dependent Potentiation of Synaptic Transmission at Mossy Fiber to CA3 Synapses in the Hippocampus <jats:p>β-Amyloid precursor protein cleavage enzyme 1 (BACE1) has been identified as a major neuronal β-secretase critical for the formation of β-amyloid (Aβ) peptide
 which is thought responsible for the pathology of Alzheimer's disease (AD).
Therefore, BACE1 is one of the key therapeutic targets that can prevent the progression of AD.
Previous studies showed that knocking out the BACE1 gene prevents Aβ formation, but results in behavioral deficits and specific synaptic dysfunctions at Schaffer collateral to CA1 synapses.
However, BACE1 protein is most highly expressed at the mossy fiber projections in CA3.
Here, we report that BACE1 knock-out mice display reduced presynaptic function, as measured by an increase in paired-pulse facilitation ratio.
More dramatically, mossy fiber long-term potentiation (LTP), which is normally expressed via an increase in presynaptic release, was eliminated in the knock-outs.
Although long-term depression was slightly larger in the BACE1 knock-outs, it could not be reversed.
The specific deficit in mossy fiber LTP was upstream of cAMP signaling and could be “rescued” by transiently elevating extracellular Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>concentration.
These results suggest that BACE1 may play a critical role in regulating presynaptic function, especially activity-dependent strengthening of presynaptic release, at mossy fiber synapses.</jats:p>
Inhibition of long‐term potentiation by CuZn superoxide dismutase injection in rat dentate gyrus: Involvement of muscarinic M1 receptor <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Long‐term potentiation (LTP) and long‐term depression represent important processes that modulate synaptic transmission that carries out a key role in neural mechanisms of memory. Many studies give strong evidences on a role of the reactive oxygen species in the induction of LTP in CA1 region of hippocampal slices that was inhibited by adding the scavenger enzyme superoxide dismutase (SOD1). Previous data showed that SOD1 is secreted by many cellular lines
 including neuroblastoma SK‐N‐BE cells through microvesicles by an ATP‐dependent mechanism; moreover, it has been shown that SOD1 interacts with human neuroblastoma cell membranes increasing intracellular calcium levels via a phospholipase C–protein kinase C pathway activation.
The aim of this study was to investigate the effect of intracerebral injection of SOD1 or the inactive form of enzyme (ApoSOD) on the modulation of synaptic transmission in dentate gyrus of the hippocampus in urethane anesthetized rats.
The results of the present research showed that intracerebral injection of SOD1 and ApoSOD in the dentate gyrus of the rat hippocampal formation inhibits LTP induced by high‐frequency stimulation of the perforant path.
This result cannot be only explained by the dismutation of oxygen radical induced by SOD1 since also ApoSOD, that lacks the enzymatic activity, carries out the same inhibitory effect on LTP induction.
J.
Cell.
Physiol.
227: 3111–3115, 2012.
© 2011 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.</jats:p>
Cholecystokinin inhibits evoked inhibitory postsynaptic currents in the rat nucleus accumbens indirectly through γ‐aminobutyric acid and γ‐aminobutyric acid type B receptors <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>We recently reported that cholecystokinin (CCK) excited nucleus accumbens (NAc) cells and depressed excitatory synaptic transmission indirectly through γ‐aminobutyric acid (GABA)
 acting on presynaptic GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub> receptors (Kombian et al.
[<jats:ext-link xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xlink:href="#bib20">2004</jats:ext-link>] J. Physiol.
555:71–84).
The present study tested the hypothesis that CCK modulates inhibitory synaptic transmission in the NAc.
Using in vitro forebrain slices containing the NAc and whole‐cell patch recording, we examined the effects of CCK on evoked inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSCs) recorded at a holding potential of −80 mV throughout CCK‐8S caused a reversible inward current accompanied by a concentration‐dependent decrease in evoked IPSC amplitude.
Maximum IPSC depression was ∼25% at 10 μM, with an estimated EC<jats:sub>50</jats:sub> of 0.1 μM.
At 1 μM, CCK‐8S induced an inward current of 28.3 ± 4.8 pA (n = 6) accompanied by an IPSC depression of −18.8% ± 1.6% (n = 6).
This CCK‐induced IPSC depression was blocked by pretreatment with proglumide (100 μM; −3.7% ± 6.9%; n = 4) and by LY225910 (100 nM), a selective CCK<jats:sub>B</jats:sub> receptor antagonist (4.4% ± 2.6%; n = 4).
It was not blocked by SCH23390 (10 μM; −23.5% ± 1.3%; <jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.05; n = 7) or sulpiride (10 μM; −21.8% ± 5.1%; <jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.05; n = 4), dopamine receptor antagonists.
By contrast, it was blocked by CGP55845 (1 μM; −0.4% ± 3.4%; n = 5) a potent GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub> receptor antagonist, and by forskolin (50 μM; 9.9% ± 5.2%; n = 4), an adenylyl cyclase activator, and H‐89 (1 μM; 6.9% ± 3.9%; n = 4), a protein kinase A (PKA) inhibitor.
These results indicate that CCK acts on CCK<jats:sub>B</jats:sub> receptors to increase extracellular levels of GABA, which then acts on GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub> receptors to decrease IPSC amplitude.
© 2004 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
Biting releases constraints on moray eel feeding kinematics <jats:title>SUMMARY</jats:title><jats:p>We present an analysis of prey capture functional morphology in eels by comparing two species of moray eels
 Muraena retifera and Echidna nebulosa (Family Muraenidae), to the American eel Anguilla rostrata (Family Anguillidae).
The skulls of both moray species exhibited extreme reductions of several prominent components of the suction-feeding mechanism, including the hyoid bar, the sternohyoideus muscle and the pectoral girdle.
Associated with these anatomical modifications, morays showed no evidence of using suction during prey capture.
From 59 video sequences of morays feeding on pieces of cut squid we saw no hyoid depression and no movement of prey toward the mouth aperture during the strike, a widely used indicator of suction-induced water flow.
This was in contrast to A. rostrata, which exhibited a robust hyoid, sternohyoideus muscle and pectoral girdle, and used suction to draw prey into its mouth.
Average prey capture time in morays, about 500 ms, was roughly 10 times longer than in A. rostrata, and morays frequently reversed the direction of jaw and head rotation in the midst of the strike.
We tested whether the absence of suction feeding reduces temporal constraints on feeding kinematics, permitting greater variance in traits that characterize timing and the extent of motion in the neurocranium, by comparing moray eel species with A. rostrata,two Centrarchids and a cichlid.
Kinematic variance was roughly 5 times higher in morays than the suction-feeding species.
Prey capture by suction demands a rapid, highly coordinated series of cranial movements and the loss of this mechanism appears to have permitted slower, more variable prey capture kinematics in morays.
The alternative prey capture strategy in morays, biting,may be tied to their success as predators in the confined spaces of reef crevices where they hunt for cephalopods, crustaceans and fish.</jats:p>
[Pharmacological study of phenethyl-8-oxa-1-diaza-3
8-spiro(4,5)decanone-2 hydrochloride or fenspiride (JP 428)].
1.
Arzneimittelforschung.
1969 Aug;19(8):1263-71.
[Pharmacological study of phenethyl-8-oxa-1-diaza-3,8-spiro(4,5)decanone-2 
hydrochloride or fenspiride (JP 428)].
[Article in French]

LeDouarec JC, Duhault J, Laubie M.

PMID: 4390182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Mechanism of ethonium effect on membrane preparations of brain Na+
 K+-ATPase].
1.
Ukr Biokhim Zh (1978).
1983 Jul-Aug;55(4):398-402.
[Mechanism of ethonium effect on membrane preparations of brain Na+, K+-ATPase].
[Article in Russian]

Nazarenko VI, Pastukhova TE, Belik IaV.
The effect of ethonium, a local anesthetic, on the membrane preparations of 
brain N+, K+-ATPase was studied by fluorescent, radioisotopic, 
electron-microscopic and electrophysiological methods.
Ethonium is established 
to affect the formation of an intermediate phosphorylated product and has no 
pronounced destructive effect on the membrane.
It changes the fluorescence 
intensity of 2-toluidinonaphthalen-6-sulphonate (TNS), astrafloxin (AF) and 
fluorene probes in a suspension of the Na+, K+-ATPase preparations, which 
evidences for ethonium-induced changes in the structure of membrane fragments.
PMID: 6312652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of burimamide on histamine- and pentagastrin-stimulated acid and pepsin secretion in the pig. 1. S Afr Med J. 1974 Sep 28;48(47):1985-90.

Effect of burimamide on histamine- and pentagastrin-stimulated acid and pepsin 
secretion in the pig.

Barbezat GO
 Waterworth MW, Daniel M, Bank S, Terblanche J.

PMID: 4153649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Interaction between the serotonergic system and HPA and HPT axes in patients with major depression: implications for pathogenesis of suicidal behavior. 1. Dialogues Clin Neurosci. 2002 Dec;4(4):417. doi:
10.31887/DCNS.2002.4.4/fduval.

Interaction between the serotonergic system and HPA and HPT axes in patients 
with major depression: implications for pathogenesis of suicidal behavior.

Duval F(1)
 Mokrani MC, Monreal J, Weiss T, Fattah S, Hamel B, Macher JP.
Author information:
(1)FORENAP, Institute for Research in Neuroscience and Neuropsychiatry, 
Rouffach, France.
Disturbances in the serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) system constitute the 
neurobiological abnormality most consistently associated with suicide.
This 
abnormality could be a marker of vulnerability predisposing individuals to 
auto-aggressive and impulsive behavior.
However, other abnormalities, such as 
hyperactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis, have also been 
described in suicide victims.
While inhibitory effects of adrenocorticosteroids 
on 5-HT(1A) receptor function have been shown in animals, HPA axis hyperactivity 
does not seem to be responsible for the reduced 5-HT activity found in depressed 
patients with a history of suicidal behavior.
On the other hand, 
hypothalamic-pituitarythyroid (HPT) axis dysfunction, frequently observed in 
depression, may represent a compensatory response to reduced central 5-HT 
neurotransmission.
Moreover, in depressed patients with a history of suicidal 
behavior, the absence of a functional link between HPT and dopamine activity at 
the hypothalamic level may be implicated in the pathophysiology of suicidal 
behavior.
Future research is needed to determine why compensatory mechanisms are 
not efficient in patients with suicidal behavior.
Las alteracíones en el sistema serotoninérgico (5-hidroxitriptamina, 5-HT) 
constítuyen la anormalidad neurobiológica más consistentemente asociada con el 
suicidio.
Esta anormalidad podría constituir un marcador de vulnerabilidad que 
predispusiera a los sujetos a conductas autoagresivas e impulsivas.
Sin embargo, 
también han sido descritas otras anormalidades en víctimas de suicidio como la 
hiperactividad del eje hipotálamo-hipófisis-adrenal (HHA).
Mientras que en 
animales se han observado los efectos inhibitorios de los adrenocorticosteroides 
en la función del receptor 5-HT1A, en pacientes depresivos con una historia de 
conductas suicidas la hiperactividad del eje HHA no parece ser responsable de la 
reducción de la actividad serotoninérgica.
Por otra parte, la disfunción del eje 
hipotálamo-hipófisistiroides (HHT), que se observa con frecuencia en la 
depresión, puede representar una respuesta compensatoria a la reducción de la 
neurotransmisión central de serotonina.
Sin embargo, en pacientes depresivos con 
una historia de conductas suicidas, la ausencia de una relación funcional entre 
la actividad HHT y la dopamina a nivel del hipotalámo puede estar involucrada en 
la fisiopatología de la conducta suicida.
Se requiere de futuras investigaciones 
para determinar por qué los mecanismos compensatorios no son eficientes en 
pacientes con conducias suicidas.
Les perturbations du système sérotoninergique (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) 
constituent l'anomalie neurobiologique la plus régulièrement associée au 
suicide.
Cette anomalie pourrait être un marqueur de vulnérabilité prédisposant 
des individus à développer un comportement autoagressif et impulsif.
Cependant, 
d'autres anomalies, comme l'hyperactivité de l'axe 
hypothalamo-hypophyso-surrénalien (HHS), ont aussi été décrites chez des 
victimes de suicide.
Alors que les effets inhibiteurs des hormones 
corticosurrénales sur la fonction du récepteur 5-HT1A ont été montrés chez 
l'animal, l'hyperactivité de taxe HHS ne semble pas responsable de l'activité 
5-HT réduite retrouvée chez les patients déprimés et ayant des antécédents de 
comportement suicidaire.
Par ailleurs, le dysfonctionnement de l'axe 
hypothalamo-hypophyso-thyroïdien (HHT), fréquemment observé dans la dépression, 
pourrait représenter une réponse compensatrice pour restaurer la 
neurotransmission centrale 5-HT.
De plus, chez les patients déprimés ayant des 
antécédents de comportement suicidaire, l'absence de lien fonctionnel entre 
l'HHT et l'activité dopaminergique au niveau hypothalamique pourrait être 
impliquée dans la physiopathologie du comportement suicidaire.
Des recherches 
sont nécessaires à l'avenir pour déterminer la raison pour laquelle les 
mécanismes compensateurs ne sont pas efficaces chez les patients suicidaires.
DOI: 10.31887/DCNS.2002.4.4/fduval
PMCID: PMC3181696
PMID: 22033833
IL-1 receptor-antagonist (IL-1Ra) knockout mice show anxiety-like behavior by aging 1. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Jul 10;599:20-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.05.019. Epub 
2015 May 19.

IL-1 receptor-antagonist (IL-1Ra) knockout mice show anxiety-like behavior by 
aging.

Wakabayashi C(1)
 Numakawa T(2), Odaka H(2), Ooshima Y(2), Kiyama Y(3), Manabe 
T(3), Kunugi H(2), Iwakura Y(4).
Author information:
(1)Department of Mental Disorder Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan; Division of 
Cell Biology, Center for Experimental Medicine, Institute of Medical Science, 
University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
Electronic address: 
wakab@ncnp.go.jp.
(2)Department of Mental Disorder Research, National Institute of Neuroscience, 
National Center of Neurology and Psychiatry, Kodaira, Tokyo, Japan.
(3)Division of Neuronal Network, Department of Basic Medical Sciences, Institute 
of Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
(4)Division of Cell Biology, Center for Experimental Medicine, Institute of 
Medical Science, University of Tokyo, Minato-ku, Tokyo, Japan.
Interleukin 1 (IL-1) plays a critical role in stress responses, and its mRNA is 
induced in the brain by restraint stress.
Previously, we reported that IL-1 
receptor antagonist (IL-1Ra) knockout (KO) mice, which lacked IL-1Ra molecules 
that antagonize the IL-1 receptor, showed anti-depression-like behavior via 
adrenergic modulation at the age of 8 weeks.
Here, we report that IL-1Ra KO mice 
display an anxiety-like phenotype that is induced spontaneously by aging in the 
elevated plus-maze (EPM) test.
This anxiety-like phenotype was improved by the 
administration of diazepam.
The expression of the anxiety-related molecule 
glucocorticoid receptor (GR) was significantly reduced in 20-week-old but not in 
11-week-old IL-1Ra KO mice compared to wild-type (WT) littermates.
The 
expression of the mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) was not altered between IL-1Ra 
KO mice and WT littermates at either 11 or 20 weeks old.
Analysis of monoamine 
concentration in the hippocampus revealed that tryptophan, the serotonin 
metabolite 5-hydroxyindole acetic acid (5-HIAA), and the dopamine metabolite 
homovanillic acid (HVA) were significantly increased in 20-week-old IL-1Ra KO 
mice compared to littermate WT mice.
These findings strongly suggest that the 
anxiety-like behavior observed in older mice was caused by the complicated 
alteration of monoamine metabolism and/or GR expression in the hippocampus.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.05.019
PMID: 26002078 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Splitting or Lumping? A Conservation Dilemma Exemplified by the Critically Endangered Dama Gazelle (Nanger dama) 1. PLoS One. 2014 Jun 23;9(6):e98693. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098693. 
eCollection 2014.

Splitting or lumping? A conservation dilemma exemplified by the critically 
endangered dama gazelle (Nanger dama).

Senn H(1)
 Banfield L(2), Wacher T(3), Newby J(4), Rabeil T(5), Kaden J(1), 
Kitchener AC(6), Abaigar T(7), Silva TL(8), Maunder M(9), Ogden R(1).
Author information:
(1)WildGenes Laboratory, Royal Zoological Society of Scotland, Edinburgh, United 
Kingdom.
(2)Conservation Department, Al Ain Zoo, Al Ain, Abu Dhabi, United Arab Emirates.
(3)Conservation Programmes, Zoologicial Society of London, Regents Park, London, 
United Kingdom.
(4)Sahara Conservation Fund, L'Isle, Switzerland.
(5)Sahara Conservation Fund, Niamey, Niger.
(6)Department of Natural Sciences, National Museums Scotland, Chambers Street, 
Edinburgh, United Kingdom; Institute of Geography, School of Geosciences, 
University of Edinburgh, Drummond Street, Edinburgh, United Kingdom.
(7)Estación Experimental de Zonas Áridas, Consejo Superior de Investigaciones 
Científicas (CSIC), Almería, Spain.
(8)CIBIO/InBIO, Centro de Investigção em Biodiversidade e Recursos Genéticos da 
Universidade do Porto, Vairão, Portugal; Estación Experimental de Zonas Áridas, 
Consejo Superior de Investigaciones Científicas (CSIC), Almería, Spain; 
Departamento de Biologia da, Faculdade de Ciências da Universidade do Porto, 
Porto, Portugal.
(9)College of Arts and Sciences, Florida International University, Miami, 
Florida, United States of America.
Managers of threatened species often face the dilemma of whether to keep 
populations separate to conserve local adaptations and minimize the risk of 
outbreeding, or whether to manage populations jointly to reduce loss of genetic 
diversity and minimise inbreeding.
In this study we examine genetic relatedness 
and diversity in three of the five last remaining wild populations of dama 
gazelle and a number of captive populations, using mtDNA control region and 
cytochrome b data.
Despite the sampled populations belonging to the three 
putative subspecies, which are delineated according to phenotypes and 
geographical location, we find limited evidence for phylogeographical structure 
within the data and no genetic support for the putative subspecies.
In the light 
of these data we discuss the relevance of inbreeding depression, outbreeding 
depression, adaptive variation, genetic drift, and phenotypic variation to the 
conservation of the dama gazelle and make some recommendations for its future 
conservation management.
The genetic data suggest that the best conservation 
approach is to view the dama gazelle as a single species without subspecific 
divisions.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0098693
PMCID: PMC4067283
PMID: 24956104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Neurobehavioral phenotyping of Gαq knockout mice reveals impairments in motor functions and spatial working memory without changes in anxiety or behavioral despair 1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2012 Jun 19;6:29. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2012.00029. 
eCollection 2012.

Neurobehavioral phenotyping of G(αq) knockout mice reveals impairments in motor 
functions and spatial working memory without changes in anxiety or behavioral 
despair.

Frederick AL(1)
 Saborido TP, Stanwood GD.
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Graduate Program, Vanderbilt University School of Medicine, 
Nashville TN, USA.
Many neurotransmitters, hormones, and sensory stimuli elicit their cellular 
responses through the targeted activation of receptors coupled to the G(αq) 
family of heterotrimeric G proteins.
Nevertheless, we still understand little 
about the consequences of loss of this signaling activity on brain function.
We 
therefore examined the effects of genetic inactivation of Gnaq, the gene that 
encode for G(αq), on responsiveness in a battery of behavioral tests in order to 
assess the contribution of G(αq) signaling capacity in the brain circuits 
mediating expression of affective behaviors (anxiety and behavioral despair), 
spatial working memory, and locomotor output (coordination, strength, 
spontaneous activity, and drug-induced responses).
First, we replicated and 
extended findings showing clear motor deficits in G(αq) knockout mice as 
assessed on an accelerating rotarod and the inverted screen test.
We then 
assessed the contribution of the basal ganglia motor loops to these impairments, 
using open field testing and analysis of drug-induced locomotor responses to the 
psychostimulant cocaine, the benzazepine D(1) receptor agonists SKF83822 and 
SKF83959, and the NMDA receptor antagonist MK-801.
We observed significant 
increases in drug-induced locomotor activity in G(αq) knockout mice from the 
dopaminergic agonists but not MK-801, indicating that basal ganglia locomotor 
circuitry is largely intact in the absence of G(αq).
Additionally, we observed 
normal phenotypes in both the elevated zero maze and the forced swim test 
indicating that anxiety and depression-related circuitry appears to be largely 
intact after loss of Gnaq expression.
Lastly, use of the Y-maze revealed spatial 
memory deficits in G(αq) knockout mice, indicating that receptors signaling 
through G(αq) are necessary in these circuits for proficiency in this task.
DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2012.00029
PMCID: PMC3377978
PMID: 22723772
Factor XIII of blood coagulation inhibits the oxidative phagocyte metabolism and suppresses the immune response in vivo 1. Thromb Res. 1991 Jul 15;63(2):227-38. doi: 10.1016/0049-3848(91)90286-6.

Factor XIII of blood coagulation inhibits the oxidative phagocyte metabolism and 
suppresses the immune response in vivo.

Stief TW(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Hematology
 Hospital Virgen del Rocío, University of Seville, 
Spain.
Factor XIII of blood coagulation (F XIII) belongs to the family of 
transglutaminases and is a major cell product of certain subsets of macrophages.
The gene for F XIIIA is coupled to the immune response genes of the HLA-region 
on chromosome 6.
F XIII dose- dependently inhibits the in vitro 
chemiluminescence response of human phagocytes.
About 0.1 units of F XIII/ml 
(final) decreased the chemiluminescence response to about 50%.
In addition, 
about 0.6 units of F XIII/ml inhibits 50% of the release of the lysosomal 
hydrolase N-acetyl-beta glucosaminidase in both immune complex stimulated and 
unstimulated monocytes.
Intraperitoneal application of F XIII reduced the 
activity of phagocytes in a F XIII dose dependent manner.
0.25 units of F XIII 
reduced the chemiluminescence reaction of murine peritoneal M phi to about 50% 
of the activity of PBS treated animals after 2 or 24 hours of in vivo 
incubation.
In the Fisher/Lewis rats skin transplantation model, injections of 5 
units of F XIII/animal on days 1-7 or on days 10-17 increased the survival times 
of the transplants from the control value of 17.0 +/- 1.4 to 26.0 +/- 2.0 and 
23.0 +/- 2.4 days, respectively.
F XIII may represent a novel and physiological 
immune suppressive agent for a broad range of human diseases of autoimmune 
character.
DOI: 10.1016/0049-3848(91)90286-6
PMID: 1771628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Comparative Effects of Halothane
 Enflurane, and Isoflurane on Atrioventricular Conductivity and Subsidiary Pacemaker Function in Dogs 1.
Anesth Analg.
1994 Sep;79(3):455-9. doi: 10.1213/00000539-199409000-00009.
Comparative effects of halothane, enflurane, and isoflurane on atrioventricular 
conductivity and subsidiary pacemaker function in dogs.
Hantler CB(1), Wilton NC, Knight PR.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Texas Health Science Center, San 
Antonio 78284-7838.
This study compares effects of equipotent concentrations of halothane, 
enflurane, and isoflurane on atrioventricular (AV) function in dogs.
Enflurane 
anesthesia was associated with more AV nodal depression, only at faster heart 
rates than either halothane or isoflurane.
These rate-related effects are 
important in the genesis of supraventricular reentrant tachyarrhythmias.
Subsidiary pacemaker function exhibited marked variability between and within 
animals with no demonstrable difference between anesthetic drugs.
Enflurane has 
more depressant effects on AV nodal recovery properties than halothane or 
isoflurane; however, there were no differences demonstrated on slow AV nodal 
conduction.
This suggests that enflurane would be the most effective volatile 
anesthetic in converting or slowing supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, while 
carrying no more risk of causing advanced heart block.
DOI: 10.1213/00000539-199409000-00009
PMID: 8067548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
AGN-2979
 an inhibitor of tryptophan hydroxylase activation, does not affect serotonin synthesis in Flinders Sensitive Line rats, a rat model of depression, but produces a significant effect in Flinders Resistant Line rats 1.
Neurochem Int.
2009 Dec;55(7):529-35. doi: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.05.008.
Epub 
2009 May 20.
AGN-2979, an inhibitor of tryptophan hydroxylase activation, does not affect 
serotonin synthesis in Flinders Sensitive Line rats, a rat model of depression, 
but produces a significant effect in Flinders Resistant Line rats.
Kanemaru K(1), Nishi K, Diksic M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology and Neurosurgery, Montreal Neurological Institute, 
McGill University, Quebec, Canada.
The neurotransmitter, serotonin, is involved in several brain functions, 
including both normal, physiological functions, and pathophysiological 
functions.
Alterations in any of the normal parameters of serotonergic 
neurotransmission can produce several different psychiatric disorders, including 
major depression.
In many instances, brain neurochemical variables are not able 
to be studied properly in humans, thus making the use of good animal models 
extremely valuable.
One of these animal models is the Flinders Sensitive Line 
(FSL) of rats, which has face, predictive and constructive validities in 
relation to human depression.
The objective of this study was to quantify the 
effect of the tryptophan hydroxylase (TPH) activation inhibitor, AGN-2979, on 
the FSL rats (rats with depression-like behaviour), and compare it to the effect 
on the Flinders Resistant Line (FRL) of rats used as the control rats.
The 
effect was evaluated by measuring changes in regional serotonin synthesis in the 
vehicle treated rats (FSL-VEH and FRL-VEH) relative to those measured in the 
AGN-2979 treated rats (FSL-AGN and FRL-AGN).
Regional serotonin synthesis was 
measured autoradiographically in more than 30 brain regions.
The measurements 
were performed using alpha-[(14)C]methyl-l-tryptophan as the tracer.
The results 
indicate that AGN-2979 did not produce a significant reduction of TPH activity 
in the AGN-2979 group relative to the vehicle group (a reduction would have been 
observed if there had been an activation of TPH by the experimental setup) in 
the FSL rats.
On the other hand, there was a highly significant reduction of 
synthesis in the FRL rats treated by AGN-2979, relative to the vehicle group.
Together, the results demonstrate that in the FSL rats, AGN-2979 does not affect 
serotonin synthesis.
This suggests that there was no activation of TPH in the 
FSL rats during the experimental procedure, but such activation did occur in the 
FRL rats.
Because of this finding, it could be hypothesized that TPH in the FSL 
rats cannot be easily activated.
This may contribute to the development of 
depressive-like symptoms in the FSL rats ("depressed" rats), as they cannot 
easily modulate their need for elevated amounts of this neurotransmitter, and 
possibly other neurotransmitters.
Further, because these rats represent a very 
good model of human depression, one can hypothesize that humans who do not have 
readily activated TPH may be more prone to develop depression.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuint.2009.05.008
PMCID: PMC2778282
PMID: 19463878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of sulpiride on oxygen uptake by rat's brain tissue in vitro 1. Experientia. 1973 Sep 15;29(9):1100-1. doi: 10.1007/BF01946743.

Effect of sulpiride on oxygen uptake by rat's brain tissue in vitro.

Velasco-Martin A
 Lorenzo-Fernandez P, Garcia de Jalon PD.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01946743
PMID: 4744859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cortical control of thermogenesis induced by lateral hypothalamic lesion and overeating <jats:p> Increased O2 consumption was found in rats after bilateral lesions of the lateral hypothalamus (LH) or during voluntary overeating. This phenomenon appears to be mediated by the sympathetic nervous system (SNS) in both conditions
 since it is blocked by the beta-blocker propranolol administration.
In the first experiment we showed that the brain cortex is involved in the thermogenesis induced by LH lesion and this effect is mediated by SNS, since bilateral functional decortication induced by cortical-spreading depression (CSD) impaired the increase of O2 consumption to the same extent as administration of propranolol.
In the second experiment the role played by the cerebral cortex on thermogenesis in rats during voluntary overeating of "cafeteria" diet and in control rats was investigated.
Cafeteria rats showed a significantly higher colonic temperature, brown adipose tissue temperature (Tbat), and rate of O2 consumption than control animals.
CSD led to a significant decrease of Tbat and O2 consumption in cafeteria rats but not in controls.
On the basis of the results obtained in the two experiments, the possibility that the cerebral cortex could be involved in the metabolic responses for reduction of body weight to the "set-point" is hypothesized.
</jats:p>
A Temporal Relationship between Reticuloendothelial System Phagocytic Alterations and Antibody Responses in Mice Infected with Plasmodium Berghei (NYU-2 Strain) 1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1976 Mar;25(2):221-8. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.1976.25.221.

A temporal relationship between reticuloendothelial system phagocytic 
alterations and antibody responses in mice infected with Plasmodium berghei 
(NYU-2 strain).

Loose LD
 di Luzio NR.
Malaria-induced immunosuppression has been demonstrated in humans and 
experimental animals.
The suppressed immune response has been suggested to be 
primarily humoral and not cellular in nature, since classical lymphocytic 
cell-mediated responses have been reported to be normal.
Since previous results 
have demonstrated that an impairment in macrophage antigen processing may be a 
contributing factor in malaria-induced immunosuppression, the present studies 
were conducted to determine if the macrophage/reticuloendothelial system (RES) 
alteration occurs parallel to the course of the malarial infection and if the 
impairment in antibody formation is temporally related to the RES alteration.
The present study has demonstrated that a profound impairment in splenic direct 
plaque forming cell (PFC) formation occurs in malaria-infected Balb/c mice which 
had been immunized with sheep erythrocytes (SRBC) either 2 or 4 days after 
inoculation with Plasmodium berghei, NYU-2 strain.
Serum hemagglutinin titers 
were significantly depressed in mice which received the SRBC 4 days 
post-inoculation; however, no alterations in antibody titers were observed in 
mice immunized with SRBC 2 days post-inoculation.
Coincident with the depression 
of serum antibody titers at the day 4 immunization period was a profound 
increase in the vascular clearance of 51Cr-SRBC with an enhanced hepatic uptake 
of the 51Cr-SRBC and a decreased splenic localization of the labelled 
erythrocytes.
It is suggested that a direct vascular exposure of the splenic 
lymphoid-macrophage elements to the parasite may be responsible for the initial 
early alterations in the PFC response while the impairment in serum antibody 
titers and splenic phagocytic activity may be a result of the pathological 
alterations occurring later in the infection, e.g., tissue anoxia, anemia, and 
hemolysis.
DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1976.25.221
PMID: 769577 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The mechanism of acetylcholine release from parasympathetic nerves <jats:p>1. The output of acetylcholine from the plexus of the guinea‐pig ileum longitudinal strip has been used to study the mechanism of acetylcholine release. From the effects of hexamethonium and tetrodotoxin
 it was inferred that 60% of the normal resting output is due to propagated activity in the plexus, and 40% to spontaneous release.
Tetrodotoxin virtually abolishes the increase in output in response to electrical stimulation.</jats:p><jats:p>2.
Resting acetylcholine output is increased when the bathing medium is changed in the following ways:</jats:p><jats:p>(<jats:italic>a</jats:italic>) sodium replacement by sucrose, trometamol or lithium;</jats:p><jats:p>(<jats:italic>b</jats:italic>) addition of ouabain or <jats:italic>p</jats:italic>‐hydroxymercuribenzoate (PHMB), or withdrawal of potassium;</jats:p><jats:p>(<jats:italic>c</jats:italic>) the combination of PHMB and partial sodium replacement;</jats:p><jats:p>(<jats:italic>d</jats:italic>) addition of potassium; this increase in output becomes greater in the absence of sodium.</jats:p><jats:p>3.
The resting output is virtually abolished by calcium withdrawal, and is restored by barium substitution for calcium.
It is also reduced by raising the magnesium concentration.</jats:p><jats:p>4.
The enhanced resting output in response to sodium withdrawal also occurs in the absence of calcium.</jats:p><jats:p>5.
Cooling to 5° C greatly reduces both the resting output and the output in response to raised potassium concentration or to electrical stimulation.</jats:p><jats:p>6.
The increase in resting output due to potassium excess is slight up to 25 m
<jats:sc>M</jats:sc> [K<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>]<jats:sub>o</jats:sub>, but increases thereafter with about the fourth power of the potassium concentration; it is resistant to tetrodotoxin.</jats:p><jats:p>7.
Synthesis of acetylcholine by the longitudinal strip is increased when output is enhanced by electrical stimulation, by potassium excess or by addition of barium, so that the acetylcholine content of the strip is maintained approximately normal.
Synthesis is reduced, in relation to output, by potassium lack or by treatment with ouabain, and is virtually abolished by sodium withdrawal.</jats:p><jats:p>8.
The theory is discussed that acetylcholine release depends on inhibition of the activity of a (Na<jats:sup>+</jats:sup> + K<jats:sup>+</jats:sup> + Mg<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>)‐activated ATPase at the axonal membrane.</jats:p>
A Hierarchical Phosphorylation Cascade That Regulates the Timing of PERIOD Nuclear Entry Reveals Novel Roles for Proline-Directed Kinases and GSK-3β/SGG in Circadian Clocks <jats:p>The daily timing of when PERIOD (PER) proteins translocate from the cytoplasm to the nucleus is a critical step in clock mechanisms underpinning circadian rhythms in animals. Numerous lines of evidence indicate that phosphorylation plays a prominent role in regulating various aspects of PER function and metabolism
 including changes in its daily stability and subcellular distribution.
In this report, we show that phosphorylation of serine 661 (Ser661) by a proline-directed kinase(s) is a key phospho-signal on the<jats:italic>Drosophila</jats:italic>PER protein (dPER) that regulates the timing of its nuclear accumulation.
Mutations that block phosphorylation at Ser661 do not affect dPER stability but delay its nuclear entry in key pacemaker neurons, yielding longer behavioral rhythms.
Intriguingly, abolishing phosphorylation at Ser661 also attenuates the extent of dPER hyperphosphorylation<jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>, suggesting the phosphorylated state of Ser661 regulates phosphorylation at other sites on dPER.
Indeed, we identify Ser657 as a site that is phosphorylated by the glycogen synthase kinase GSK-3β (SHAGGY; SGG) in a manner dependent on priming at Ser661.
Although not as dramatic as mutating Ser661, mutations that abolish phosphorylation at Ser657 also lead to longer behavioral periods, suggesting that a multi-kinase hierarchical phosphorylation module regulates the timing of dPER nuclear entry.
Together with evidence in mammalian systems, our findings implicate proline-directed kinases in clock mechanisms and suggest that PER proteins are key downstream targets of lithium therapy, a potent inhibitor of GSK-3β used to treat manic depression, a disorder associated with clock malfunction in humans.</jats:p>
Increased depressive behaviour in females and heightened corticosterone release in males to swim stress after adolescent social stress in rats 1. Behav Brain Res. 2008 Jun 26;190(1):33-40. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2008.02.004.
Epub  2008 Feb 8.

Increased depressive behaviour in females and heightened corticosterone release 
in males to swim stress after adolescent social stress in rats.

Mathews IZ(1)
 Wilton A, Styles A, McCormick CM.
Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Brock University, 500 Glenridge Avenue, St. 
Catharines, Ontario, Canada.
We previously reported that males undergoing chronic social stress (SS) (daily 
1h isolation and new cage partner on days 30-45 of age) in adolescence 
habituated (decreased corticosterone release) to the homotypic stressor, but 
females did not.
Here, we report that adolescent males exposed to chronic social 
stress had potentiated corticosterone release to a heterotypic stressor (15 min 
of swim stress) compared to acutely stressed and control males.
The three groups 
of males did not differ in depressive-like behaviour (time spent immobile) 
during the swim stress.
Corticosterone release in socially stressed females was 
elevated 45 min after the swim stress compared to acutely stressed and control 
females, and socially stressed females exhibited more depressive behaviour 
(longer durations of immobility and shorter durations of climbing) than the 
other females during the swim stress.
Separate groups of rats were tested as 
adults several weeks after the social stress, and there were no group 
differences in corticosterone release after the swim stress.
The only group 
difference in behaviour among the adults was more time spent climbing in 
socially stressed males than in controls.
Thus, there are sex-specific effects 
of social stress in adolescence on endocrine responses and depressive behaviour 
to a heterotypic stressor, but, unlike for anxiety, substantial recovery is 
evident in adulthood in the absence of intervening stress exposures.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2008.02.004
PMID: 18342957 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Participation of pontine structures in the respiratory action of opioids 1. Life Sci. 1983;33 Suppl 1:571-4. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(83)90567-2.

Participation of pontine structures in the respiratory action of opioids.

Hurlé MA
 Mediavilla A, Flórez J.
The respiratory action of morphine, D-Ala2-D-Leu5-enkephalin, and 
D-Ala2-Me-Phe4-Met(O)ol5-enkephalin, restrictively applied to the dorso-rostral 
surface of the pons, was studied in anesthetized cats.
Frequency was selectively 
and dose-dependently depressed, down to apnea, whereas tidal volume and its 
response to CO2 either remained unchanged or were increased.
Similar effects 
were observed in vagotomized and decerebrate cats.
From these and previous (1) 
results, it can be concluded that the medullary and pontine structures related 
to respiration are differentially affected by opioids.
Pontine nuclei are more 
sensitive to opioid depression and account for changes in frequency, whereas 
medullary depression results in reduction of tidal volume and CO2 sensitivity.
DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(83)90567-2
PMID: 6363854 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Machine-learning identifies substance-specific behavioral markers for opiate and stimulant dependence 1. Drug Alcohol Depend. 2016 Apr 1;161:247-57. doi: 
10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.02.008. Epub 2016 Feb 15.

Machine-learning identifies substance-specific behavioral markers for opiate and 
stimulant dependence.

Ahn WY(1)
 Vassileva J(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, The Ohio State University, 1835 Neil Avenue, 
Columbus, OH 43210, USA.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, Virginia Commonwealth University, 1200 E. Broad 
Street, Richmond, VA 23298, USA; Institute for Drug & Alcohol Studies, Virginia 
Commonwealth University, 203 E. Cary Street, Richmond, VA 23219, USA.
Electronic 
address: jasmin.vassileva@vcuhealth.edu.
BACKGROUND: Recent animal and human studies reveal distinct cognitive and 
neurobiological differences between opiate and stimulant addictions; however, 
our understanding of the common and specific effects of these two classes of 
drugs remains limited due to the high rates of polysubstance-dependence among 
drug users.
METHODS: The goal of the current study was to identify multivariate 
substance-specific markers classifying heroin dependence (HD) and amphetamine 
dependence (AD), by using machine-learning approaches.
Participants included 39 
amphetamine mono-dependent, 44 heroin mono-dependent, 58 polysubstance 
dependent, and 81 non-substance dependent individuals.
The majority of substance 
dependent participants were in protracted abstinence.
We used demographic, 
personality (trait impulsivity, trait psychopathy, aggression, sensation 
seeking), psychiatric (attention deficit hyperactivity disorder, conduct 
disorder, antisocial personality disorder, psychopathy, anxiety, depression), 
and neurocognitive impulsivity measures (Delay Discounting, Go/No-Go, Stop 
Signal, Immediate Memory, Balloon Analogue Risk, Cambridge Gambling, and Iowa 
Gambling tasks) as predictors in a machine-learning algorithm.
RESULTS: The machine-learning approach revealed substance-specific multivariate 
profiles that classified HD and AD in new samples with high degree of accuracy.
Out of 54 predictors, psychopathy was the only classifier common to both types 
of addiction.
Important dissociations emerged between factors classifying HD and 
AD, which often showed opposite patterns among individuals with HD and AD.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that different mechanisms may underlie HD and 
AD, challenging the unitary account of drug addiction.
This line of work may 
shed light on the development of standardized and cost-efficient clinical 
diagnostic tests and facilitate the development of individualized prevention and 
intervention programs for HD and AD.
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.drugalcdep.2016.02.008
PMCID: PMC4955649
PMID: 26905209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of Interest No conflict declared.
Proceedings: Effect of exogenous progesterone injected within the first 5 days after mating on conception in ewes 1. J Reprod Fertil. 1974 Feb;36(2):485-6. doi: 10.1530/jrf.0.0360485.

Proceedings: Effect of exogenous progesterone injected within the first 5 days 
after mating on conception in ewes.

Johnsson ID
 Hecker JF, Wodzicka-Tomaszewska M.

DOI: 10.1530/jrf.0.0360485
PMID: 4856465 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Poisoning of goats by the pods of Luetzelburgia auriculata 1. Toxicon. 2010 Jun 1;55(6):1115-8. doi: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.12.020. Epub
2010  Jan 1.

Poisoning of goats by the pods of Luetzelburgia auriculata.

Mello GW(1)
 Oliveira DM, Carvalho CJ, Cavalcante MV, Costa FA, Riet-Correa F, 
Silva SM.
Author information:
(1)Universidade Federal do Piauí, Teresina, Piauí, Brazil.
Farmers report that the pods of Luetzelburgia auriculata cause digestive signs 
and death when ingested by goats.
To demonstrate the toxicity of the pods of 
this plant 12 goats were divided into 4 groups of 3 goats each.
Groups 1, 2, 3 
and 4 were administered 2.5, 1, 0.5 and nil g of pods per kg body weight, 
respectively.
Goats in Groups 1 and 2 developed decreased ruminal movements 
followed by anorexia, depression and soft feces or diarrhea.
Goats in Group 1 
died 59-106 h after first showing clinical signs.
Goats in Group 2 also 
regurgitated rumen content, but all recovered 65-90 h after first showing 
clinical signs.
The only clinical sign shown by goats in Group 3 was 
regurgitation of rumen content, and all goats recovered 5.5-24 h after first 
regurgitating.
All goats in Group 4 remained normal.
The goats that died were 
necropsied and found to have a reddish mucosa of the forestomachs that detached 
easily from the underlying tissues.
Other lesions included diffuse reddening of 
the mucosa of the abomasum and intestine.
Histological examination of the mucosa 
of the forestomachs showed diffuse ballooning degeneration of keratinocytes, 
with necrosis and vesicle and pustule formation in the epithelium.
In some areas 
there was sloughing of the ruminal epithelium.
These results demonstrate that 
the pods of L. auriculata are toxic and responsible for field outbreaks of 
poisoning in goats in the state of Piaui.
Copyright 2009 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.toxicon.2009.12.020
PMID: 20043935 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
International Brain Research Organization--Seventh World Congress of Neuroscience. 12-17 July 2007
 Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
1.
IDrugs.
2007 Oct;10(10):690-2.

International Brain Research Organization--Seventh World Congress of 
Neuroscience.
12-17 July 2007, Melbourne, Victoria, Australia.
Hannan AJ(1).
Author information:
(1)Howard Florey Institute, University of Melbourne, Parkville, VIC 3010, 
Australia.
anthony.hannan@florey.edu.au

PMID: 17899483 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antiarrhythmic effects of proadifen hydrochloride (SKF 525-A). 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1970 Jun;20(6):851-3.

Antiarrhythmic effects of proadifen hydrochloride (SKF 525-A).

Viana AP
 Osswald W.

PMID: 5468902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cardiorenal Metabolic Syndrome and Diabetic Cognopathy <jats:p>The prevalence of the cardiorenal metabolic syndrome (CRS) is increasing in parallel with obesity
 type 2 diabetes mellitus, Alzheimer's disease, and other forms of dementia.
Along with metabolic, inflammatory, and immunological abnormalities, there is maladaptive structural remodeling of the heart, kidney, and brain.
The term ‘diabetic cognopathy' (DC) may be used when discussing functional and structural changes in the brain of the diabetic patient.
DC likely represents an advanced form of these changes in the brain that evolve with increasing duration of the CRS and subsequent clinical diabetes.
We posit that DC develops due to a convergence of aging, genetic and lifestyle abnormalities (overnutrition and lack of exercise), which result in multiple injurious metabolic and immunologic toxicities such as dysfunctional immune responses, oxidative stress, inflammation, insulin resistance, and dysglycemia (systemically and in the brain).
These converging abnormalities may lead to endothelial blood-brain barrier tight junction/adherens junction (TJ/AJ) complex remodeling and microglia activation, which may result in neurodegeneration, impaired cognition, and dementia.
Herein, we describe the brain ultrastructural changes evolving from a normal state to maladaptive remodeling in rodent models of CRS including microglia activation/polarization and attenuation and/or loss of the TJ/AJ complexes, pericytes and astrocytes of the neurovascular unit.
Further, we discuss the potential relationship between these structural changes and the development of DC, potential therapeutic strategies, and future directions.</jats:p>
Dietary restriction reverses obesity-induced anhedonia 1. Physiol Behav. 2014 Apr 10;128:126-32. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.01.026.
Epub  2014 Feb 8.

Dietary restriction reverses obesity-induced anhedonia.

Grillo CA(1)
 Mulder P(1), Macht VA(1), Kaigler KF(1), Wilson SP(1), Wilson 
MA(2), Reagan LP(3).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and Neuroscience, University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC, United States.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and Neuroscience, University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC, United States; WJB Dorn Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Columbia, SC, United States.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Physiology and Neuroscience, University of South 
Carolina School of Medicine, Columbia, SC, United States; WJB Dorn Veterans 
Affairs Medical Center, Columbia, SC, United States.
Electronic address: 
lpreagan@uscmed.sc.edu.
Obesity-induced changes in the metabolic and endocrine milieu elicit deficits in 
neuroplasticity, including increased risk for development of neuropsychiatric 
disorders such as depressive illness.
We previously demonstrated that 
downregulation of hypothalamic insulin receptors (hypo-IRAS) elicits a phenotype 
that is consistent with features of the metabolic syndrome (MetS) and that rats 
with this phenotype exhibit deficits in neuronal plasticity, including 
depressive-like behaviors such as anhedonia.
Since food restriction paradigms 
effectively inhibit obesity-induced neuroplasticity deficits, the aim of the 
current study was to determine whether food restriction could reverse 
obesity-induced anhedonia in hypo-IRAS rats.
Compared to hypo-IRAS rats provided 
ad lib food access, food restriction paradigms that were initiated either prior 
to increases in body weight or following development of the MetS/obesity 
phenotype effectively restored sucrose intake in hypo-IRAS rats.
Moreover, food 
restriction paradigms were able to prevent and reverse the changes in the 
endocrine/metabolic/inflammatory milieu observed in hypo-IRAS, such as increases 
in plasma leptin and triglyceride levels and increases in pro-inflammatory 
cytokines such as IL-1α, IL-6 and C-reactive protein (CRP).
Collectively, these 
results demonstrate that obesity-induced anhedonia is a reversible process and 
identify some potential mechanistic mediators that may be responsible for 
co-morbid depression in obesity.
Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.01.026
PMCID: PMC3997237
PMID: 24518861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Necessity of Hippocampal Neurogenesis for the Therapeutic Action of Antidepressants in Adult Nonhuman Primates 1. PLoS One. 2011 Apr 15;6(4):e17600. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017600.

Necessity of hippocampal neurogenesis for the therapeutic action of 
antidepressants in adult nonhuman primates.

Perera TD(1)
 Dwork AJ, Keegan KA, Thirumangalakudi L, Lipira CM, Joyce N, Lange 
C, Higley JD, Rosoklija G, Hen R, Sackeim HA, Coplan JD.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, College of Physicians and Surgeons, Columbia 
University Medical Center and New York State Psychiatric Institute, New York, 
New York, United States of America.
tp119@columbia.edu

BACKGROUND: Rodent studies show that neurogenesis is necessary for mediating the 
salutary effects of antidepressants.
Nonhuman primate (NHP) studies may bridge 
important rodent findings to the clinical realm since NHP-depression shares 
significant homology with human depression and kinetics of primate neurogenesis 
differ from those in rodents.
After demonstrating that antidepressants can 
stimulate neurogenesis in NHPs, our present study examines whether neurogenesis 
is required for antidepressant efficacy in NHPs.
MATERIALS/METHODOLOGY: Adult 
female bonnets were randomized to three social pens (N = 6 each).
Pen-1 subjects 
were exposed to control-conditions for 15 weeks with half receiving the 
antidepressant fluoxetine and the rest receiving saline-placebo.
Pen-2 subjects 
were exposed to 15 weeks of separation-stress with half receiving fluoxetine and 
half receiving placebo.
Pen-3 subjects 2 weeks of irradiation (N = 4) or 
sham-irradiation (N = 2) and then exposed to 15 weeks of stress and fluoxetine.
Dependent measures were weekly behavioral observations and postmortem 
neurogenesis levels.
RESULTS: Exposing NHPs to repeated separation stress resulted in depression-like 
behaviors (anhedonia and subordinance) accompanied by reduced hippocampal 
neurogenesis.
Treatment with fluoxetine stimulated neurogenesis and prevented 
the emergence of depression-like behaviors.
Ablation of neurogenesis with 
irradiation abolished the therapeutic effects of fluoxetine.
Non-stressed 
controls had normative behaviors although the fluoxetine-treated controls had 
higher neurogenesis rates.
Across all groups, depression-like behaviors were 
associated with decreased rates of neurogenesis but this inverse correlation was 
only significant for new neurons in the anterior dentate gyrus that were at the 
threshold of completing maturation.
CONCLUSION: We provide evidence that induction of neurogenesis is integral to 
the therapeutic effects of fluoxetine in NHPs.
Given the similarity between 
monkeys and humans, hippocampal neurogenesis likely plays a similar role in the 
treatment of clinical depression.
Future studies will examine several 
outstanding questions such as whether neuro-suppression is sufficient for 
producing depression and whether therapeutic neuroplastic effects of fluoxetine 
are specific to antidepressants.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0017600
PMCID: PMC3078107
PMID: 21525974 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Activation of brain indoleamine 2
3-dioxygenase contributes to epilepsy-associated depressive-like behavior in rats with chronic temporal lobe epilepsy 1.
J Neuroinflammation.
2014 Mar 4;11:41. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-11-41.
Activation of brain indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase contributes to 
epilepsy-associated depressive-like behavior in rats with chronic temporal lobe 
epilepsy.
Xie W(1), Cai L, Yu Y, Gao L, Xiao L, He Q, Ren Z, Liu Y.
Author information:
(1)Department of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Nanfang Hospital, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, People's Republic of China.
xieweizn@fimmu.com.
BACKGROUND: Depression has most often been diagnosed in patients with temporal 
lobe epilepsy (TLE), but the mechanism underlying this association remains 
unclear.
In this study, we report that indoleamine 2,3-dioxygenase 1 (IDO1), a 
rate-limiting enzyme in tryptophan metabolism, plays a key role in 
epilepsy-associated depressive-like behavior.
METHODS: Rats which develop chronic epilepsy following pilocarpine status 
epilepticus exhibited a set of interictal disorders consistent with 
depressive-like behavior.
Changes of depressive behavior were examined by taste 
preference test and forced swim test; brain IL-1β, IL-6 and IDO1 expression were 
quantified using real-time reverse transcriptase PCR; brain 
kynurenine/tryptophan and serotonin/tryptophan ratios were analyzed by liquid 
chromatography-mass spectrometry.
Oral gavage of minocycline or subcutaneous 
injection of 1-methyltryptophan (1-MT) were used to inhibite IDO1 expression.
RESULTS: We observed the induction of IL-1β and IL-6 expression in rats with 
chronic TLE, which further induced the upregulation of IDO1 expression in the 
hippocampus.
The upregulation of IDO1 subsequently increased the 
kynurenine/tryptophan ratio and decreased the serotonin/tryptophan ratio in the 
hippocampus, which contributed to epilepsy-associated depressive-like behavior.
The blockade of IDO1 activation prevented the development of depressive-like 
behavior but failed to influence spontaneous seizures.
This effect was achieved 
either indirectly, through the anti-inflammatory tetracycline derivative 
minocycline, or directly, through the IDO antagonist 1-MT, which normalizes 
kynurenine/tryptophan and serotonin/tryptophan ratios.
CONCLUSION: Brain IDO1 activity plays a key role in epileptic rats with 
epilepsy-associated depressive-like behavior.
DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-11-41
PMCID: PMC3975854
PMID: 24594021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Early onset of cognitive impairment is associated with altered synaptic plasticity and enhanced hippocampal GluA1 expression in a mouse model of depression 1. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 May;36(5):1938-52. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.02.015. Epub 2015 Feb 19.

Early onset of cognitive impairment is associated with altered synaptic 
plasticity and enhanced hippocampal GluA1 expression in a mouse model of 
depression.

Gross M(1)
 Sheinin A(2), Nesher E(3), Tikhonov T(3), Baranes D(3), Pinhasov 
A(3), Michaelevski I(4).
Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel.
(2)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel; Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
(3)Department of Molecular Biology, Ariel University, Ariel, Israel.
(4)Department of Biochemistry and Molecular Biology, Tel Aviv University, Tel 
Aviv, Israel; Sagol School of Neuroscience, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, 
Israel.
Electronic address: izhakm@post.tau.ac.il.
Memory deficit is a common manifestation of age-related cognitive impairment, of 
which depression is a frequently occurring comorbidity.
Previously, we developed 
a submissive (Sub) mouse line, validated as a model of depressive-like behavior.
Using learning paradigms testing hippocampus-dependent spatial and nonspatial 
memory, we demonstrate here that Sub mice developed cognitive impairments at 
earlier age (3 months), compared with wild-type mice.
Furthermore, acute 
hippocampal slices from Sub animals failed to display paired-pulse facilitation, 
whereas primed burst stimulation elicited significantly enhanced long-term 
potentiation in region CA1, relative to control mice.
Changes in synaptic 
plasticity were accompanied by markedly reduced hippocampal messenger RNA 
expression of insulin-like growth factor and brain-derived neurotrophic factor.
Finally, we identified markedly elevated protein levels of the 
α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor subunit 
GluA1 in the hippocampi of Sub mice, which was exacerbated with age.
Taken 
together, the results point to a linkage between depressive-like behavior and 
the susceptibility to develop age-related cognitive impairment, potentially by 
hippocampal α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid 
receptor-mediated glutamatergic signaling.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2015.02.015
PMID: 25796132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Decreased 3H-diazepam binding is a specific response to chronic benzodiazepine treatment 1. Life Sci. 1979 Feb 26;24(9):803-7. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(79)90364-3.

Decreased 3H-diazepam binding is a specific response to chronic benzodiazepine 
treatment.

Rosenberg HC
 Chiu TH.
DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(79)90364-3
PMID: 36541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Early depression of Ankrd2 and Csrp3 mRNAs in the polyribosomal and whole tissue fractions in skeletal muscle with decreased voluntary running <jats:p>The wheel-lock (WL) model for depressed ambulatory activity in rats has shown metabolic maladies ensuing within 53–173 h after WL begins. We sought to determine if WL beginning after 21–23 days of voluntary running in growing female Wistar rats affected the mRNA profile in the polyribosomal fraction from plantaris muscle shortly following WL. In experiment 1
 WL occurred at 0200 and muscles were harvested at 0700 daily at 5 h (WL5h, n = 4), 29 h (WL29h, n = 4), or 53 h (WL53h, n = 4) after WL.
Affymetrix Rat Gene 1.0 ST Arrays were used to test the initial question as to whether WL affects mRNA occupancy on skeletal muscle polyribosomes.
Using a false discovery rate of 15%, no changes in mRNAs in the polyribosomal fraction were observed at WL29h and eight mRNAs (of over 8,200 identified targets) were altered at WL53h compared with WL5h.
Interestingly, two of the six downregulated genes included ankyrin repeat domain 2 (Ankrd2) and cysteine-rich protein 3/muscle LIM protein (Csrp3), both of which encode mechanical stretch sensors and RT-PCR verified their WL-induced decline.
In experiment 2, whole muscle mRNA and protein levels were analyzed for Ankrd2 and Csrp3 from the muscles of WL5h (4 original samples + 2 new), WL29h (4 original), WL53h (4 original + 2 new), as well as WL173 h ( n = 6 new) and animals that never ran (SED, 4–5 new).
Relative to WL5h controls, whole tissue Ankrd2 and Csrp3 mRNAs were lower ( P &lt; 0.05) at WL53h, WL173h, and SED; Ankrd2 protein tended to decrease at WL53h ( P = 0.054) and Csrp3 protein was less in WL173h and SED rats ( P &lt; 0.05).
In summary, unique early declines in Ankrd2 and Csrp3 mRNAs were identified with removal of voluntary running, which was subsequently followed by declines in Csrp3 protein levels during longer periods of wheel lock.</jats:p>
Longitudinal follow-up of the mental health of unaccompanied refugee minors 1. Eur Child Adolesc Psychiatry. 2014 May;23(5):337-46. doi: 
10.1007/s00787-013-0463-1. Epub 2013 Aug 25.

Longitudinal follow-up of the mental health of unaccompanied refugee minors.

Vervliet M(1)
 Lammertyn J, Broekaert E, Derluyn I.
Author information:
(1)Department of Social Welfare Studies, Faculty of Psychology and Educational 
Sciences, Ghent University, Henri Dunantlaan 2, 9000, Ghent, Belgium, 
Marianne.Vervliet@UGent.be.
Despite growing numbers of unaccompanied refugee minors (UMs) in Europe, and 
evidence that this group is at risk of developing mental health problems, there 
still remain important knowledge gaps regarding the development of UMs' mental 
health during their trajectories in the host country and, in particular, the 
possible influencing role of traumatic experiences and daily stressors therein.
This study therefore followed 103 UMs from the moment they arrived in Belgium 
until 18 months later.
Traumatic experiences (SLE), mental health symptoms 
(HSCL-37A, RATS) and daily stressors (DSSYR) were measured at arrival in 
Belgium, after 6 and 18 months.
UMs reported generally high scores on anxiety, 
depression and post-traumatic stress disorder (PTSD).
Linear mixed model 
analysis showed no significant differences in mental health scores over time, 
pointing towards the possible long-term persistence of mental health problems in 
this population.
The number of traumatic experiences and the number of daily 
stressors leaded to a significant higher symptom level of depression (daily 
stressors), anxiety and PTSD (traumatic experiences and daily stressors).
European migration policies need to reduce the impact of daily stressors on UMs' 
mental health by ameliorating the reception and care facilities for this group.
Moreover, regular mental health screenings are needed, in combination with, if 
needed, adapted psychosocial and therapeutic care.
DOI: 10.1007/s00787-013-0463-1
PMID: 23979476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
<i>In vivo</i>treatment with a monoclonal chimeric anti-CD4 antibody results in prolonged depletion of circulating CD4+ cells in chimpanzees <jats:title>SUMMARY</jats:title><jats:p>Chimeric M-T412 (cM-T412). an anti-CD4 antibody
 was tolerated in chimpanzees at a dosage of 5 mg/kg per day for up to 7 consecutive days, or 5 mg/kg per dose, twice weekly for 4 weeks.
All cM-T412-treated chimpanzees showed a prolonged CD4 cell depression.
Weak chimpanzee antibody responses to chimeric M-T412 were observed.
One of the chimpanzees on the biweekly dosage regimen exhibited a hypersensitivity reaction immediately after receiving its seventh dose.
Following supportive treatment, the animal recovered and remained asymptomatic during the non-treatment observation period.
The hypersensitivity reaction was not an unexpected response considering the animal received repeated intermittent i.v.
administration of a foreign protein.
This animal also showed a chimpanzee antibody response to chimeric M-T412 after the seventh dose.
Chimeric M-T412 also induced an anti-cM-T412 response in some of the other animals.
The level of this response was lower than the anti-mouse responses observed in animals treated with murinc anti-CD4.
Moreover, the anti-cM-T4l 2 response was mainly directed to idiotypic determinants.
The decrease in CD4+ cells observed for all chimeric M-T412-treated chimpanzees is an expected effect of the anti-CD4 antibody.
The duration of this CD4+ cell decrease is.
however, much longer than observed for other CD4-specific MoAbs described.
No selective loss of either memory or naive CD4+ cells was observed after cither the single, 7-day or twice-weekly treatments.
The CD4+ cell depression was reversible, although individual variation in time to recovery was observed.
Therefore, cM-T412 could be a good candidate for clinical use in autoimmune conditions.</jats:p>
Alkylaminoalkyl-dithiocarbamic acids
 new drugs against Pityrosporum ovale.
1.
Arzneimittelforschung.
1968 Sep;18(9):1205-7.
Alkylaminoalkyl-dithiocarbamic acids, new drugs against Pityrosporum ovale.
Muftic M, Hoyer G.

PMID: 4237099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of cell growth by oxygenated derivatives of cholesterol 1. Nature. 1974 Oct 4;251(5474):419-21. doi: 10.1038/251419a0.

Inhibition of cell growth by oxygenated derivatives of cholesterol.

Chen HW
 Kandutsch AA, Waymouth C.

DOI: 10.1038/251419a0
PMID: 4472548 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant Activity of Astilbin: Involvement of Monoaminergic Neurotransmitters and BDNF Signal Pathway 1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2014;37(6):987-95. doi: 10.1248/bpb.b13-00968. Epub 2014 Mar 
28.

Antidepressant activity of astilbin: involvement of monoaminergic 
neurotransmitters and BDNF signal pathway.

Lv QQ(1)
 Wu WJ, Guo XL, Liu RL, Yang YP, Zhou DS, Zhang JX, Liu JY.
Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Xinxiang Medical Univserity.
Depression and related mood disorders are among the world's greatest public 
health problems.
Previous studies have demonstrated that astilbin (AST) has 
broad pharmacological functions which may modulate numerous pathways, such as 
antioxidant, scavenging free radicals, anti-inflammatory and so on, similarly to 
some of other flavonoids.
In this study, the antidepressant-like effect of AST 
was investigated using chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) model of 
depression in mice.
The results showed that chronic administration of AST at 
doses of 10, 20 and 40 mg/kg (intraperitoneally (i.p.
), 21 d) reduced 
depressive-like behaviors of mice in the forced swim test (FST), tail suspension 
test (TST) and sucrose preference test (SPT) without affecting locomotor 
activity.
AST increased the contents of serotonin (5-HT) and dopamine (DA) in 
the frontal cortex of CUMS mice.
Additionally, it was shown that AST treatment 
restored the CUMS-induced inhibition of extracellular signal-regulated kinase 
(ERK) 1/2 and AKT phosphorylation in the frontal cortex, conformed to the 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) expression.
Our findings suggest that 
AST has antidepressant activities and the mechanisms, at least in part, relate 
to up-regulation of monoaminergic neurotransmitters (5-HT and DA) and activation 
of the BDNF signaling pathway.
DOI: 10.1248/bpb.b13-00968
PMID: 24681540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Plasticité cérébrale et neuropathologies : Nouvelles voies pour le médicament 1. Med Sci (Paris). 2005 Jan;21(1):104-9. doi: 10.1051/medsci/2005211104.

[Synaptic plasticity and neuropathology: new approaches in drug discovery].

[Article in French]

Spedding M(1)
 Lestage P.

Author information:
(1)Institut de Recherches Servier, Suresnes, France.
Neuronal plasticity is now known to be very important in the adult, both in the 
formation of new synaptic connections and of new neurones (neurogenesis) and of 
glial cells.
However, old age and stress can inhibit this plasticity and lead to 
cerebral atrophy.
The time course of changes in neuronal plasticity involves, in 
the first milliseconds to seconds, changes in synaptic strength (long term 
potentialisation, LTP, or long term depression, LTD), then, over minutes to 
hours, changes in the number of synaptic connections (linked to changes in 
neurotrophic factors), and over weeks to months, to changes in neuronal 
reconfiguration.
These changes in brain systems are particularly targeted in 
psychiatric disorders to the areas which are sensitive to stress and play roles 
in memory and emotion (hippocampus, amygdala and prefrontal cortex).
The 
discovery and development of drugs modifying neuronal plasticity and 
neurotrophins production has been a priority for Servier research for the last 
ten years; Servier has a clinically effective antidepressant, tianeptine 
(Stablon), with a favourable side effect profile, but which does not inhibit the 
uptake of serotonin, or other monoamines.
However, this drug can reverse the 
deleterious effects of stress on neuronal plasticity, thereby acting on the 
causes of psychiatric disorders.
Furthermore, a new research area is being 
investigated - facilitation of AMPA receptors, favouring the production of 
neurotrophic factors.
DOI: 10.1051/medsci/2005211104
PMID: 15639031 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Regulation of the GABAA Receptor by Nitric Oxide in Frog Pituitary Melanotrophs* <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Nitric oxide (NO) is implicated in the regulation of various endocrine functions
 but the effect of NO on GABAA receptor transmission has never been reported in endocrine cells.
In the present study, we have investigated the effects of various agents acting on the NO transduction pathway on GABAA receptor function in frog pituitary melanotrophs.
Histochemical studies using the NADPH-diaphorase reaction and immunohistochemical labeling with antibodies against neuronal NO synthase (nNOS) revealed that nNOS is expressed in the intermediate lobe of the pituitary and in cultured melanotrophs.
Whole-cell patch-clamp recordings showed that the specific substrate of NOS l-arginine (l-Arg, 10−4m) or the NO donor sodium nitroprusside (10−5m) provoked a long-lasting inhibition of the current evoked by GABA (5 × 10−6m).
The NOS inhibitor l-nitroarginine (10−5m) produced a biphasic effect, i.e.
a transient decrease followed by a delayed increase of the GABA-evoked current amplitude.
Similarly, the specific nNOS inhibitor 7-nitroindazole and the specific inducible NOS (iNOS) inhibitor aminoguanidine (10−5m each) provoked a transient depression of the current followed by a sustained potentiation.
Formation of cGMP in neurointermediate lobes was enhanced by l-Arg (10−4m) and by the calcium-releasing agent caffeine (10−4m), and inhibited by the calmodulin (CaM)/Ca2+ complex blocker W7 (10−5m).
The GABA-evoked current was potentiated by the guanylyl cyclase inhibitor ODQ (10−8–10−7m) and inhibited by the protein kinase G (PKG) activator 8pCPT-cGMP (3 × 10−7–3 × 10−5m).
The present data indicate that NO, produced by a CaM/Ca2+-dependent NOS in frog melanotrophs, exerts an autocrine inhibitory effect on the GABA-evoked current.
The action of NO on the GABAA receptor function is mediated through activation of the cGMP/PKG pathway.</jats:p>
Population collapse to extinction: the catastrophic combination of parasitism and Allee effect 1. J Biol Dyn. 2010 Jan;4(1):86-101. doi: 10.1080/17513750903026429.

Population collapse to extinction: the catastrophic combination of parasitism 
and Allee effect.

Hilker FM(1).

Author information:
(1)Centro de Matemática e Aplicações Fundamentais
 Universidade de Lisboa, 
Lisboa, Portugal.
f.hilker@bath.ac.uk

Infectious diseases are responsible for the extinction of a number of species.
In conventional epidemic models, the transition from endemic population 
persistence to extirpation takes place gradually.
However, if host demographics 
exhibits a strong Allee effect (AE) (population decline at low densities), 
extinction can occur abruptly in a catastrophic population crash.
This might 
explain why species suddenly disappear even when they used to persist at high 
endemic population levels.
Mathematically, the tipping point towards population 
collapse is associated with a saddle-node bifurcation.
The underlying mechanism 
is the simultaneous population size depression and the increase of the 
extinction threshold due to parasite pathogenicity and Allee effect.
Since 
highly pathogenic parasites cause their own extinction but not that of their 
host, there can be another saddle-node bifurcation with the re-emergence of two 
endemic equilibria.
The implications for control interventions are discussed, 
suggesting that effective management may be possible for ℛ(0)≫1.
DOI: 10.1080/17513750903026429
PMID: 22881072 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Palytoxin Poisoning After Dermal Contact with Zoanthid Coral 1. J Emerg Med. 2011 Apr;40(4):397-9. doi: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2009.05.004. Epub 
2009 Jul 9.

Palytoxin poisoning after dermal contact with zoanthid coral.

Nordt SP(1)
 Wu J, Zahller S, Clark RF, Cantrell FL.
Author information:
(1)Division of Medical Toxicology and Department of Emergency Medicine, 
University of California, San Diego, San Diego, California 92103-8925, USA.
BACKGROUND: Palytoxin is most commonly reported after ingestion of seafood.
We 
report a case of palytoxin poisoning from dermal absorption with local toxicity 
from zoanthid coral in a patient with intact skin.
CASE REPORT: A 25-year-old previously healthy woman handled a zoanthid coral 
from a home aquarium without any barrier protection.
The patient manifested 
neurologic symptoms of perioral paresthesia and dysguesia.
In addition, there 
was local dermatologic toxicity that persisted for several days.
The patient was 
treated supportively with corticosteroids and a histamine antagonist.
CONCLUSION: We report a case of palytoxin poisoning from dermal absorption after 
handling a zoanthid coral.
Palytoxin is a potent marine toxin that affects the 
sodium-potassium ATPase (adenosinetriphosphatase) pump and can cause multiple 
clinical effects, including paresthesia, dysguesia, hypertension, respiratory 
depression, coma, and death.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jemermed.2009.05.004
PMID: 19545971 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Design and Synthesis of Novel Arylpiperazine Derivatives Containing the Imidazole Core Targeting 5-HT<sub>2A</sub> Receptor and 5-HT Transporter 1. J Med Chem. 2011 Sep 22;54(18):6305-18. doi: 10.1021/jm200682b. Epub 2011 Aug 
23.

Design and synthesis of novel arylpiperazine derivatives containing the 
imidazole core targeting 5-HT(2A) receptor and 5-HT transporter.

Seo HJ(1)
 Park EJ, Kim MJ, Kang SY, Lee SH, Kim HJ, Lee KN, Jung ME, Lee M, Kim 
MS, Son EJ, Park WK, Kim J, Lee J.
Author information:
(1)Research Center, Green Cross Corporation, 303 Bojeong-dong, Giheung-gu, 
Yongin 446-770, Korea.
Serotonin antagonist reuptake inhibitor (SARI) drugs that block both 5-HT(2) 
receptors and the serotonin transporters have been developed.
The human 
5-HT(2A/2C) receptor has been implicated in several neurological conditions, and 
potent selective 5-HT(2A/2C) ligands may have therapeutic potential for 
treatment of CNS diseases such as depression.
An imidazole moiety usually 
provides good pharmacokinetic properties as a drug substance, and thus 
considerable efforts have been devoted to develop imidazole derivatives into 
drug candidates.
The imidazole series of compounds was evaluated against 
5-HT(2A/2C) and serotonin reuptake inhibition.
A few of the compounds in the 
series showed promising IC(50) values and antidepressant-like effect in in vivo 
forced swimming test (FST).
On the basis of these results, further lead 
optimization studies resulted in identifying promising compounds potentially for 
therapeutic use.
DOI: 10.1021/jm200682b
PMID: 21823597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant behavioral effects of duloxetine and amitriptyline in the rat forced swimming test <jats:p>PURPOSE: To compare the effects of the antidepressant drugs duloxetine and amitriptyline on depressive behaviors in rats. METHODS: Fifteen male Wistar rats were given systemic injections of duloxetine
 amitriptyline or saline prior to a Forced Swimming Test (FST).
Immobility and number of stops were measured.
Data were analyzed by one-way ANOVA and Kruskall-Wallis.
RESULTS: Rats given injections of duloxetine displayed fewer stops than the amitriptyline and control group (p&lt; 0.05).
The control group and Amitriptyline showed no difference (p=0.8).
CONCLUSION: Duloxetine reduced depressive behaviors in the Forced Swimming Test been more effective than amitriptyline.</jats:p>
Anxiolytic and Antidepressant-Like Effects of the Aqueous Extract of<i>Alafia multiflora</i>Stem Barks in Rodents <jats:p>The present study examined the anxiolytic and antidepressant effects of the aqueous extract of<jats:italic>Alafia multiflora Stapf</jats:italic>(AM) stem barks (150 and 300 mg/kg
 7 days administration) on rats and mice, using experimental paradigms of anxiety and depression.
In the open field, the aqueous extract increased significantly the number of center square crossed and the time spent at the center of the field as well as the rearing time, while the grooming time was reduced significantly.
In the elevated plus maze, the aqueous extract increased the time spent and the number of entries in the open arms.
All these effects were also completely reversed by flumazenil, an antagonist of benzodiazepine receptors and pindolol a<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>-adrenoceptors blocker/5-HT 1A/1B receptor antagonist.
The time spent in the light compartment, the latency time, and the number of the light-dark transitions increased significantly in the light/dark exploration test after the treatment with AM.
The extract was able to reduce significantly the immobility time and increase swimming as well as climbing duration.
Taken together, the present work evidenced anxiolytic effects of the aqueous extract of AM that might involve an action on benzodiazepine-type receptors and an antidepressant effect where noradrenergic mechanisms will probably play a role.</jats:p>
Tough Tendons 1. J Biol Chem. 1997 Dec 19;272(51):32623-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.272.51.32623.

Tough tendons. Mussel byssus has collagen with silk-like domains.

Qin XX(1)
 Coyne KJ, Waite JH.
Author information:
(1)College of Marine Studies and Department of Chemistry and Biochemistry, 
University of Delaware, Newark, Delaware 19716, USA.
The primary structure of the alpha-chain of preCol-D (molecular mass = 80 kDa), 
a tanned collagenous protein predominating in the distal portion of the byssal 
threads of the mussel Mytilus edulis, was deduced from cDNA to encode an 
unprecedented natural block copolymer with three major domain types: a central 
collagen domain flanked by fibroin-like domains and followed by histidine-rich 
termini.
The fibroin-like domains have sequence motifs that strongly resemble 
the crystalline polyalanine-rich and amorphous glycine-rich regions of spider 
dragline silk fibroins.
The terminal regions resemble the histidine-rich domains 
of a variety of metal-binding proteins.
The silk domains may toughen the 
collagen by increasing its strength and extensibility.
PreCol-D expression is 
limited to the mussel foot, which contains a longitudinal gradient of preCol-D 
mRNA.
This gradient increases linearly in the proximal to distal direction and 
reaches a maximum just before the distal depression of the foot.
DOI: 10.1074/jbc.272.51.32623
PMID: 9405478 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Baclofen inhibits the spontaneous and visually evoked responses of neurones in the striate cortex of the cat 1. Neurosci Lett. 1987 Mar 31;75(2):187-92. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(87)90295-3.

Baclofen inhibits the spontaneous and visually evoked responses of neurones in 
the striate cortex of the cat.

Baumfalk U
 Albus K.

The effects of iontophoretic application of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and 
beta-p-chlorophenyl-GABA (baclofen) on the activity of single neurones in the 
striate cortex of anaesthetized and paralysed cats were compared.
Both compounds 
inhibited the spontaneous and the visually evoked responses of 92% of the 
neurones tested (n = 75) and they also eliminated the enhancement of the 
spontaneous and the evoked responses induced by the microiontophoretic 
application of glutamate.
Bicuculline methiodide (BMI) antagonized the 
GABA-induced inhibition but did not significantly alter the effectiveness of 
baclofen for most neurones tested.
The findings suggest that GABAB receptors are 
ubiquitous in the striate cortex of the cat.
Evidence is presented to suggest 
that the GABAA and GABAB receptor subtypes differ in their distribution on some 
striate neurons.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(87)90295-3
PMID: 2883615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ezogabine (KCNQ2/3 channel opener) prevents delayed activation of meningeal nociceptors if given before but not after the occurrence of cortical spreading depression 1. Epilepsy Behav. 2013 Aug;28(2):243-8. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2013.02.029. Epub 
2013 Apr 5.

Ezogabine (KCNQ2/3 channel opener) prevents delayed activation of meningeal 
nociceptors if given before but not after the occurrence of cortical spreading 
depression.

Zhang X(1)
 Jakubowski M, Buettner C, Kainz V, Gold M, Burstein R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia and Critical Care, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical 
Center, Harvard Medical School, Boston, MA 02215, USA.
Comment in
    Epilepsy Behav.
2013 Aug;28(2):241-2. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2013.04.018.
We proposed recently that induction of delayed activation of trigeminovascular 
neurons by cortical spreading depression (CSD) can explain the delayed onset of 
headache after the migraine aura ("aura").
This prompted us to search for ways 
to block the neuronal activation by CSD - a preclinical correlate of an attempt 
to find a drug that can block the initiation of headache when administered 
shortly after onset of aura (i.e., preemptively).
Because migraine headache and 
epileptic seizures are comorbid chronic neurological disorders characterized by 
hyperexcitable brain networks, we began the search for such goal with an M-type 
potassium channel opener.
We opted to use ezogabine, recently approved by the 
FDA as adjunctive treatment of partial onset seizures in adults, because it is a 
selective KCNQ2/3 channel opener.
When CSD was induced before ezogabine 
injection (8.25 mg/kg, i.p.
), 40% (6/15) of the units doubled their firing rate 
about 45 min later for about 95 min.
Similarly, when CSD was induced before 
vehicle was injected (4% DMSO, 0.5% methylcellulose), 50% (3/6) of the units 
doubled their firing rate about 30 min later for about 120 min.
When CSD was 
triggered 1h after ezogabine injection, it activated only 8% of the units.
By 
itself, ezogabine injection resulted in a 30% attenuation of ongoing firing in 
all 10 control units.
Thus, activation of KCNQ2/3 channels during the aura is 
unlikely to preempt the onset of headache but may reduce the incidence of 
migraine if given during prodromes that precede the headache by hours.
Given the 
mechanistic similarities between migraine aura and epileptic seizures, it may be 
worthwhile to determine whether preemptive administration of ezogabine can 
prevent oncoming seizures in patients whose warning signs precede their seizures 
by more than an hour.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2013.02.029
PMCID: PMC3700644
PMID: 23562239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement Ezogabine and 
funding for this study were provided to RB by GlaxoSmithKline.
RB has received 
honoraria from GlaxoSmithKline for consulting on headache.
All other authors 
report no conflict of interest.
<i>In vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> regulation of synaptogenesis by the novel antidepressant spadin <jats:sec><jats:title>Background and Purpose</jats:title><jats:p>We have described a novel antidepressant peptide
 spadin, that acts by blocking the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">TWIK</jats:styled-content>‐related‐potassium channel, type 1 (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">TREK</jats:styled-content>‐1).
Here, we examined possible mechanisms of action of spadin at both molecular and cellular levels.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Experimental Approaches</jats:title><jats:p>Effects of spadin were measured in primary cultures of neurons or tissues from mice injected i.v.
with spadin.
Western blots, qPCR, histochemical and electrophysiological techniques were used.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Key Results</jats:title><jats:p><jats:italic>In vitro</jats:italic>, spadin increased neuronal membrane potential and activated both the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MAPK</jats:styled-content> and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PI</jats:styled-content>3<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">K</jats:styled-content> signalling pathways, in a time‐ and concentration‐dependent manner.
The latter pathway was involved in the protective effect of spadin against staurosporine‐induced apoptosis.
Also, spadin enhanced both <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">mRNA</jats:styled-content> expression and protein of two markers of synaptogenesis, the post‐synaptic density protein of 95 kDalton (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PSD</jats:styled-content>‐95) and synapsin.
We confirmed these effects on synaptogenesis by the observation that spadin treatment significantly increased the proportion of mature spines in cortical neurons.
Finally, <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> injections of spadin led to a rapid increase in both <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">mRNA</jats:styled-content> expression and protein level of brain‐derived neurotrophic factor (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">BDNF</jats:styled-content>) in the hippocampus, confirming the antidepressant action of the peptide.
We argue for a new role of spadin in synaptogenesis as both <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">PSD</jats:styled-content>‐95 and synapsin <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">mRNA</jats:styled-content> expression and protein levels were further enhanced in the hippocampus, following treatment <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> with the peptide.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions and Implications</jats:title><jats:p>These findings provide new mechanisms of action for the rapidly acting antidepressant peptide spadin by stimulating expression of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">BDNF</jats:styled-content> and synaptic proteins, both <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> and <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Suppression of intestinal and hepatic cytochrome P4503A in murine<i>Toxoplasma infection</i>. Effects of<i>N</i>-acetylcysteine and<i>N</i><sup>G</sup>-monomethyl-L-arginine on the hepatic suppression 1. Xenobiotica. 1996 Apr;26(4):381-94. doi: 10.3109/00498259609046717.

Suppression of intestinal and hepatic cytochrome P4503A in murine Toxoplasma 
infection. Effects of N-acetylcysteine and N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine on the 
hepatic suppression.

Berg-Candolfi M(1)
 Candolfi E, Benet LZ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, University of California San Francisco, CA, USA.
1.
Cytochrome P4503A (CYP3A) expression was studied in a murine model of 
infection.
Mice were infected with a cystogenic strain of Toxoplasma gondii and 
microsomes were prepared for liver homogenates and jejunum villus tip 
enterocytes on day 10 postinfection.
Total cytochrome P450 (CYP) and CYP3A were 
quantitated, and CYP3A activity was determined.
2.
In the infected mouse, total 
CYP and CYP3A contents fell in the liver (-39 and - 49% respectively) and 
intestine (-43 and - 48 % respectively), as did the rate of metabolism of 
erythromycin (Ery) and cyclosporine A (CyA), two markers of CYP3A activity (-36 
and -26% in the liver, -35 and -58% in the intestine).
3.
To determine the 
mechanism(s) involved in the depression of hepatic CYP3A, infected mice were 
treated on day 7.5 post-infection with a monoclonal antibody raised against 
interferon-gamma (anti-IFN-gamma, or from days 7.5 to 10 post-infection with 
either N(G)-monomethyl-L-arginine (NMMA), an inhibitor of reactive nitrogen 
intermediates (RNI) production, or N-acetylcysteine (NAC), a reactive oxygen 
intermediates (ROI) scavenger.
4.
Total CYP content was restored in the liver of 
infected mice treated with anti-IFN-gamma, but with marked interindividual 
variability.
NAC treatment led to a recovery in the liver of total CYP content 
(+35 %), CYP3A content (total recovery), and the rates of Ery (+59%) and CyA 
(+87%) metabolism, whereas inconsistent results were obtained with NMMA.
These 
results suggest that NAC, but probably not NMMA, partially protects hepatic 
CYP3A from Toxoplasma-mediated suppression in mouse.
DOI: 10.3109/00498259609046717
PMID: 9173679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The thyroid hormone
 triiodothyronine, enhances fluoxetine-induced neurogenesis in rats: possible role in antidepressant-augmenting properties 1.
Int J Neuropsychopharmacol.
2010 Jun;13(5):553-61. doi: 
10.1017/S1461145709990769.
Epub 2009 Oct 19.
The thyroid hormone, triiodothyronine, enhances fluoxetine-induced neurogenesis 
in rats: possible role in antidepressant-augmenting properties.
Eitan R(1), Landshut G, Lifschytz T, Einstein O, Ben-Hur T, Lerer B.
Author information:
(1)Biological Psychiatry Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry, Hadassah-Hebrew 
University Medical Center, Jerusalem, Israel.
The thyroid hormone triiodothyronine (T3) may accelerate and augment the action 
of antidepressants.
Antidepressants up-regulate neurogenesis in adult rodent 
hippocampus.
We studied the effect of T3 and T3+fluoxetine in enhancement of 
hippocampal neurogenesis beyond that induced by fluoxetine alone and the 
correlation with antidepressant behaviour in the novelty suppressed feeding test 
(NSFT).
Rats were administered fluoxetine (5 mg/kg.d), T3 (50 mug/kg.d), 
fluoxetine (5 mg/kg.d)+T3 (50 mug/kg.d) or saline, for 21 d. Neurogenesis was 
studied by doublecortin (DCX) immunohistochemistry in the subgranular zone (SGZ) 
of the hippocampus and the subventricular zone (SVZ).
In the NSFT, latency to 
feeding in animals deprived of food was measured.
Fluoxetine and fluoxetine+T3 
increased the number of doublecortin-positive (DCX+) cells in the SGZ compared 
to saline (p=0.00005, p=0.008, respectively).
There was a trend towards an 
increased number of DCX+ cells by T3 compared to saline (p=0.06).
Combined 
treatment with fluoxetine+T3 further increased the number of DCX+ cells compared 
to T3 or fluoxetine alone (p=0.001, p=0.014, respectively).
There was no effect 
of any of the treatments on number of DCX+ cells in the SVZ.
In the NSFT, all 
treatments (T3, fluoxetine+T3 and fluoxetine) reduced latency to feeding 
compared to saline (p=0.0004, p=0.00001, p=0.00009, respectively).
Fluoxetine+T3 
further reduced latency to feeding compared to T3 alone (p=0.05).
The results 
suggest that enhancement of antidepressant action by T3 may be related to its 
effect of increasing hippocampal neurogenesis and that the antidepressant effect 
of these treatments is specific to the hippocampus and does not represent a 
general effect on cell proliferation.
DOI: 10.1017/S1461145709990769
PMID: 19835665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Simultaneous liquid-chromatographic determination of 3
4-dihydroxyphenylglycol, catecholamines, and 3,4-dihydroxyphenylalanine in plasma, and their responses to inhibition of monoamine oxidase.
<jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>This is a reversed-phase liquid-chromatographic method, with electrochemical detection, for simultaneously measuring, in plasma, the concentrations of the catecholamine precursor dihydroxyphenylalanine (DOPA); the endogenous catecholamines norepinephrine, epinephrine, and dopamine; and the deaminated catecholamine metabolites dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) and dihydroxyphenylglycol (DHPG).
We used this method to assess effects of monoamine oxidase (EC 1.4.3.4) inhibition in humans.
Plasma DHPG concentrations as determined by the present method (mean 826, SEM 61 ng/L) were similar to those found by other methods.
Inhibition of monoamine oxidase (by administering deprenyl or tranylcypromine) decreased plasma DHPG by greater than 65%, plasma DOPAC by greater than 50%, and plasma DOPA by about 20%, without consistently affecting norepinephrine or epinephrine.
Simultaneous measurement of DOPA, catecholamines, and DHPG may be useful for examining the synthesis, release, and intraneuronal metabolism of norepinephrine.
The assay method is rapid, reliable, and simple, and it provides a more comprehensive assessment of noradrenergic nervous function than does measurement only of catecholamines.</jats:p>
A linked active transport system for Na+ and K+ in a glial cell line 1. Brain Res. 1976 Mar 5;104(1):93-105. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(76)90649-1.

A linked active transport system for Na+ and K+ in a glial cell line.

Kukes G
 De Vellis J, Elul R.

Ouabain (5 X 10(-4) M) induced a 6-fold increase in intracellular Na+ and a 65% 
loss of cellular K+ in C6 glial cells which was accompanied by a 12 mV decrease 
in the resting membrane potential.
Following ouabain washout intracellular ion 
concentrations and the membrane potential returned to control levels suggesting 
that C6 is capable of active Na+ transport which is linked to uptake of K+.
A 
portion of K+ uptake under steady-state conditions is also active since K+ 
influx was reduced 32% by ouabain.
Five mM cyanide significantly increased cell 
Na+ and significantly decreased cell K+ and the membrane potential.
The 
similarity in the ratio of Na+ gained/K+ lost (ouabain 1.24, cyanide 1.41) 
suggests that the two agents inhibit the same ion transport system.
Decreased 
temperature had the paradoxical effect of increasing intracellular K+ while 
significantly decreasing both membrane potential and K+ influx.
Part of this 
effect may be due to the marked reduction in K+ efflux at low temperature.
At 6 
degrees C cell loss of K+ was much less than loss of K+ with ouabain at 37 
degrees C. The observation of a linked Na+-K+ transport system in C6 cell 
confirms the hypothesis that coupled active Na+-K+ exchange occurs in glial 
cells and suggests that ionic transport may regulate certain aspects of glial 
metabolism.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(76)90649-1
PMID: 1247910 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Opioid receptor blocker shows promise in Phase II depression trial 1. Nat Rev Drug Discov. 2013 Jun;12(6):415. doi: 10.1038/nrd4028.

Trial watch: opioid receptor blocker shows promise in Phase II depression trial.

Harrison C.

DOI: 10.1038/nrd4028
PMID: 23722336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effects of carotid body hypocapnia on ventilation in goats 1. Respir Physiol. 1990 Feb;79(2):123-35. doi: 10.1016/0034-5687(90)90012-n.

The effects of carotid body hypocapnia on ventilation in goats.

Daristotle L(1)
 Berssenbrugge AD, Engwall MJ, Bisgard GE.
Author information:
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, University of Wisconsin, Madison 
53706.
This study was designed to examine the influence of carotid body (CB) hypocapnia 
on ventilation by selectively perfusing the CB through an extracorporeal circuit 
in 19 goats.
When PcbCO2 was decreased from normocapnic levels in 14 awake goats 
(delta PcbCO2 = 10.9 Torr), PaCO2 increased 5.6 Torr (P less than 0.05) and VE 
decreased 24% (P less than 0.001) (mean values).
The ventilatory sensitivity to 
inspired CO2 was not changed by CB hypocapnia in 5 of these goats, but the 
response was shifted to the right.
During CB hypocapnia, ventilatory 
instability, including apnea, was observed in 4 of 14 goats; this irregular 
breathing continued at elevated levels of PaCO2.
In 5 anesthetized goats, CB 
hypocapnia (delta PcbCO2 = 18.0 Torr) decreased VE by 70% in the intact state, 
but produced no significant ventilatory depression after CB denervation.
We 
conclude that CB hypocapnia depresses ventilation in both awake and anesthetized 
goats mostly through CB chemoreceptor effects, and suggest that this 
hypoventilation may predispose to ventilatory instability in some animals.
DOI: 10.1016/0034-5687(90)90012-n
PMID: 2110682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hepatitis C virus infection and the brain 1. Metab Brain Dis. 2009 Mar;24(1):197-210. doi: 10.1007/s11011-008-9130-5. Epub 
2009 Jan 7.

Hepatitis C virus infection and the brain.

Weissenborn K(1)
 Tryc AB, Heeren M, Worthmann H, Pflugrad H, Berding G, 
Bokemeyer M, Tillmann HL, Goldbecker A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Hannover Medical School, 30623 Hannover, Germany.
Weissenborn.Karin@mh-hannover.de

There is growing evidence that hepatitis C virus (HCV)-infection may affect the 
brain.
About half of the HCV-infected patients complain of chronic fatigue 
irrespective of their stage of liver disease or virus replication rate.
Even 
after successful antiviral therapy fatigue persists in about one third of the 
patients.
Many patients, in addition, report of deficits in attention, 
concentration and memory, some also of depression.
Psychometric testing revealed 
deficits in attention and verbal learning ability as characteristic for 
HCV-afflicted patients with normal liver function.
Magnetic resonance 
spectroscopic studies showed alterations of the cerebral choline, 
N-acetyl-aspartate, and creatine content in the basal ganglia, white matter and 
frontal cortex, respectively.
Recently, pathologic cerebral serotonin and 
dopamine transporter binding and regional alterations of the cerebral glucose 
utilisation compatible with alterations of the dopaminergic attentional system 
were observed.
Several studies detected HCV in brain samples or cerebro-spinal 
fluid.
Interestingly, viral sequences in the brain often differed from those in 
the liver, but were closely related to those found in lymphoid tissue.
Therefore, the Trojan horse hypothesis emerged: HCV-infected mononuclear blood 
cells enter the brain, enabling the virus to reside within the brain (probably 
in microglia) and to infect brain cells, especially astrocytes.
DOI: 10.1007/s11011-008-9130-5
PMID: 19130196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Genistein Regulated Serotonergic Activity in the Hippocampus of Ovariectomized Rats under Forced Swimming Stress 1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 2010;74(10):2005-10. doi: 10.1271/bbb.100238. Epub 
2010 Oct 7.

Genistein regulated serotonergic activity in the hippocampus of ovariectomized 
rats under forced swimming stress.

Kageyama A(1)
 Sakakibara H, Zhou W, Yoshioka M, Ohsumi M, Shimoi K, Yokogoshi 
H.

Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Nutritional and Environmental Sciences, University of 
Shizuoka, Shizuoka, Japan.
The mortality of individuals suffering from depression has been increasing, 
especially post-menopausal women; therefore, their care and treatment are 
important to maintain a high quality of life.
In the present study, we evaluated 
the antidepressant-like effects of a major isoflavonoid, genistein 
(4',5,7-trihydroxyisoflavone), using a behavioral model of depression, the 
forced swimming test (FST), in ovariectomized rats.
Daily administration of 
genistein to ovariectomized rats at a dosage of 10 mg/kg of body weight/d for 14 
d significantly reduced the immobility time during the FST without changing 
motor dysfunction.
On the other hand, a higher dosage, 100 mg/kg/d, did not have 
any effects on the immobility time compared with the vehicle control.
Repeated 
administration of genistein at 10 mg/kg of body weight did not affect 
serotonergic activities in the hippocampus compared to the vehicle control in 
ovariectomized rats.
A 5-min FST trial stimulated these activities.
On the other 
hand, repeated pretreatment with genistein protected against changes in activity 
during the FST trial.
These results suggest that daily consumption of genistein 
10 mg/kg/d might have antidepressant-like effect on ovariectomized rats by 
regulating changes in serotonergic metabolism in the hippocampus under stressful 
conditions.
DOI: 10.1271/bbb.100238
PMID: 20944428 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of kappa opioids in an assay of pain-depressed intracranial self-stimulation in rats 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2010 Jun;210(2):149-59. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-009-1770-6. Epub 2010 Jan 26.

Effects of kappa opioids in an assay of pain-depressed intracranial 
self-stimulation in rats.

Negus SS(1)
 Morrissey EM, Rosenberg M, Cheng K, Rice KC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Virginia Commonwealth University, 
410 North 12th Street, Richmond, VA 23298, USA.
ssnegus@vcu.edu

RATIONALE: Selective, centrally acting kappa opioid agonists produce 
antinociception in a wide range of preclinical assays, but these compounds 
perform poorly as analgesics in humans.
This discrepancy may be related to the 
behavioral depressant effects of kappa agonists.
Kappa antagonists do not 
typically produce antinociception, but they produce antidepressant-like effects 
in some preclinical assays.
OBJECTIVE: The objective of this study was to test the hypothesis that the kappa 
agonist U69,593 and the kappa antagonist norbinaltorphimine would produce 
pronociceptive and antinociceptive effects, respectively, in an assay of 
pain-depressed behavior.
METHODS: Effects of U69,593 (0.056-0.56 mg/kg), norbinaltorphimine (10-32 
mg/kg), and morphine (3.2 mg/kg) were evaluated on the stimulation of a 
stretching response and the depression of intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS) 
of the medial forebrain bundle produced in rats by a common noxious stimulus 
(intraperitoneal administration of dilute lactic acid).
RESULTS: U69,593 produced a dose-dependent blockade of acid-stimulated 
stretching but only exacerbated acid-induced depression of ICSS.
Thus, U69,593 
produced antinociception in the assay of pain-stimulated behavior but 
pronociceptive effects in the assay of pain-depressed behavior.
Norbinaltorphimine did not alter acid-stimulated stretching or acid-induced 
depression of ICSS.
The mu opioid agonist morphine blocked both acid-stimulated 
stretching and acid-induced depression of ICSS.
CONCLUSIONS: These results support the hypothesis that prodepressant effects of 
kappa agonists may limit their clinical utility as analgesics.
These results do 
not support the use of kappa antagonists to treat depressant effects of pain.
These findings illustrate the potential value of using complementary assays of 
pain-stimulated and pain-depressed behaviors for preclinical evaluation of 
candidate analgesics.
DOI: 10.1007/s00213-009-1770-6
PMCID: PMC3156454
PMID: 20101391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
5-Methyltetrahydrofolate and tetrahydrobiopterin can modulate electrotonically mediated endothelium-dependent vascular relaxation <jats:p>
            We have investigated the ability of 5-methyltetrahydrofolate (5-MTHF) and tetrahydrobiopterin (BH
            <jats:sub>4</jats:sub>
            ) to modulate nitric oxide (NO)-independent vascular relaxations that are mediated by the sequential spread of endothelial hyperpolarization through the wall of the rabbit iliac artery by means of myoendothelial and homocellular smooth muscle gap junctions. Relaxations and subintimal smooth muscle hyperpolarizations evoked by cyclopiazonic acid were depressed by the gap junction inhibitor 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate
 whose effects were prevented by 5-MTHF and BH
            <jats:sub>4</jats:sub>
            , but not by their oxidized forms folic acid and 7,8-dihydrobiopterin.
Analogously, 5-MTHF and BH
            <jats:sub>4</jats:sub>
            , but not folic acid or 7,8-dihydrobiopterin, attenuated the depression of subintimal hyperpolarization by a connexin-mimetic peptide targeted against Cx37 and Cx40 (
            <jats:sup>37,40</jats:sup>
            Gap 26) and the depression of subadventitial hyperpolarization by a peptide targeted against Cx43 (
            <jats:sup>43</jats:sup>
            Gap 26), thus reflecting the known differential expression of Cx37 and Cx40 in the endothelium and Cx43 in the media of the rabbit iliac artery.
The inhibitory effects of 2-aminoethoxydiphenyl borate and
            <jats:sup>37,40</jats:sup>
            Gap 26 against subintimal hyperpolarization were prevented by catalase, which destroys H
            <jats:sub>2</jats:sub>
            O
            <jats:sub>2</jats:sub>
            .
5-MTHF and BH
            <jats:sub>4</jats:sub>
            thus appear capable of modulating electrotonic signaling by means of myoendothelial and smooth muscle gap junctions by reducing oxidant stress, potentially conferring an ability to reverse the endothelial dysfunction found in disease states through mechanisms that are independent of NO.
</jats:p>
Adult Neurogenesis
 Mental Health, and Mental Illness: Hope or Hype?
: Figure 1.
<jats:p>Psychiatric and neurologic disorders take an enormous toll on society.
Alleviating the devastating symptoms and consequences of neuropsychiatric disorders such as addiction, depression, epilepsy, and schizophrenia is a main force driving clinical and basic researchers alike.
By elucidating these disease neuromechanisms, researchers hope to better define treatments and preventive therapies.
Research suggests that regulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis represents a promising approach to treating and perhaps preventing mental illness.
Here we appraise the role of adult hippocampal neurogenesis in major psychiatric and neurologic disorders within the essential framework of recent progress made in understanding “normal” adult neurogenesis.
Topics addressed include the following: the life cycle of an adult hippocampal stem cell and the implications for aging; links between learning and hippocampal neurogenesis; the reciprocal relationship between cocaine self-administration and adult hippocampal neurogenesis; the role of adult neurogenesis in an animal model of depression and response to antidepressant exposure; the impact of neonatal seizures on dentate gyrus neurogenesis; and the contribution of a schizophrenia-susceptibility gene to adult hippocampal neurogenesis.
These topics are discussed in light of the regulation of adult neurogenesis, the relationship to normal neurogenesis in adulthood and aging, and, importantly, the manipulation of neurogenesis to promote mental health and treat mental illness.</jats:p>
ANTAGONISM OF MORPHINE WITH NALOXONE IN DOGS: CARDIOVASCULAR EFFECTS WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE CORONARY CIRCULATION 1. Br J Anaesth. 1977 Jun;49(6):525-33. doi: 10.1093/bja/49.6.525.

Antagonism of morphine with naloxone in dogs: cardiovascular effects with 
special reference to the coronary circulation.

Patschke D
 Eberlein HJ, Hess W, Tarnow J, Zimmermann G.

The cardiovascular effects of naloxone 15 microgram/kg following morphine 2.0 
mg/kg were studied in closed-chest dogs during light nitrous oxide-halothane 
anaesthesia.
The bolus injection of naloxone caused an increase in heart rate 
(73%), cardiac output (20%) and mean arterial pressure (20%).
Total peripheral 
resistance was unaffected.
LV dP/dt max and LV dP/dt max/IP increased by 25% and 
14% respectively, but positive inotropic effects could not be shown when load 
data, heart rate and the decrease in left ventricular ejection fraction (22%) 
were taken into consideration.
The cardiovascular stimulation resulted in an 
increase in myocardial oxygen demand (66%) which was met by an increase in 
coronary blood flow (59%).
The data suggest that the antagonism of narcotics 
with high doses of naloxone may impair the myocardial oxygen supply in patients 
suffering from coronary insufficiency.
It is concluded that naloxone should be 
titrated for each patient to ensure adequate reversal of respiratory depression 
and to avoid circulatory stress.
DOI: 10.1093/bja/49.6.525
PMID: 871349 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Protection by verapamil of mitochondrial glutathione equilibrium and phospholipid changes during reperfusion of ischemic canine myocardium. <jats:p>Pretreatment of the ischemic myocardium with verapamil protects against mitochondrial respiratory depression observed during ischemic arrest as well as during reperfusion. Since ischemic mitochondrial function appears not to be altered further by reperfusion
 the purpose of this study is to identify a biochemical event affecting mitochondria that is specifically associated with reperfusion injury.
It has been proposed that increased cellular Ca2+ influx and oxygen toxicity may result from reintroduction of coronary flow.
Increased cytosolic Ca2+ is transmitted to the mitochondria with subsequent activation of Ca2+-dependent events, including phospholipase A2.
Net production of lysophospholipids (and loss of total diacylphospholipids from the mitochondria) will proceed when reacylation mechanisms are inhibited.
Since acyl-CoA:lysophospholipid acyltransferase is a sulfhydryl-sensitive enzyme and since increased activity of glutathione peroxidase shifts the levels of the mitochondrial sulfhydryl buffer, glutathione, towards oxidation, levels of glutathione and its oxidation state were measured during reperfusion in the absence or presence of verapamil pretreatment.
Ischemia lowers total glutathione and reduces the redox ratio (reduced glutathione: oxidized glutathione) by 85%.
Reperfusion partially returns the redox ratio to control by causing oxidized glutathione to disappear from the matrix.
Verapamil maintains both the concentration and the redox potential of glutathione at control levels.
Concomitant with alterations in reduced glutathione:oxidized glutathione is a decrease in ischemic mitochondrial phospholipid content.
During reperfusion, phosphatidylethanolamine and its major constituent fatty acids (C 18:0 and C 20:4) are specifically lost from the mitochondrial membrane.
Accompanying the significant loss of arachidonic acid during reperfusion is the decreased content of 11-OH, 12-OH, and 15-OH arachidonate.
These lipid peroxidation products are not increased in ischemia.
It is proposed that oxidation of matrix glutathione to glutathione disulfide during ischemia results in formation of glutathione-protein mixed disulfides and inhibition of sulfhydryl-sensitive proteins, including acyl-CoA lysophosphatide acyltransferase.
Thus, metabolic events occurring within the ischemic period set the stage for prolonged dysfunction during reperfusion.</jats:p>
Combined cardiopulmonary assessments with implantable telemetry device in conscious freely moving cynomolgus monkeys 1. J Pharmacol Toxicol Methods. 2010 Jul-Aug;62(1):6-11. doi: 
10.1016/j.vascn.2010.05.014. Epub 2010 Jun 4.

Combined cardiopulmonary assessments with implantable telemetry device in 
conscious freely moving cynomolgus monkeys.

Authier S(1)
 Haefner P, Fournier S, Troncy E, Moon LB.
Author information:
(1)LAB Research Inc., 445 Armand Frappier, Laval, Quebec, Canada H7V 4B3.
authiers@labresearch.com

Female cynomolgus monkeys were surgically implanted with telemetry transmitters 
recording ECG (DII), arterial pressure, physical activity, body temperature, and 
tidal volume.
Respiratory rate (RR) and tidal volume (TV) were monitored 
simultaneously with the telemetry transmitter using impedance.
Impedance-based 
monitoring of RR and TV by telemetry correlated with controlled TV and with 
pneumotachometer (>98%) in restrained animals.
Control drugs with cardiovascular 
and respiratory effects, including saline, medetomidine (0.01, 0.02 and 
0.04mg/kg) and cocaine (0.5, 1.0 and 1.5mg/kg) were administered intravenously.
An averaging epoch of 5min was used for analysis of respiratory data.
Medetomidine induced significant respiratory depression with decrease in RR and 
TV in freely moving animals while cocaine increased TV, RR and minute 
ventilation (MV) with concomitant increase in heart rate when compared with time 
matched values from saline-treated animals.
The onset, duration and magnitude of 
cardiovascular and respiratory changes were correlated.
This highlights the 
dependency of the cardiovascular and respiratory systems.
The use of 
cardiopulmonary monitoring can allow continuous monitoring including during 
night time when variability of respiratory parameters is lower.
Monitoring of 
cardiovascular and respiratory parameters in the same animals could also help to 
decrease the number of animals used in research.
Copyright 2010 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.vascn.2010.05.014
PMID: 20570745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
EFFECT OF VERAPAMIL ON Ca 2³ INFLUX TO RAT PHRENIC NERVE-DIAPHRAGM PREPARATION 1. Br J Anaesth. 1987 Dec;59(12):1571-8. doi: 10.1093/bja/59.12.1571.

Effect of verapamil on Ca2+ influx to rat phrenic nerve-diaphragm preparation.

Wali FA(1)
 Suer AH.
Author information:
(1)Anaesthetics Unit, London Hospital Medical College, Whitechapel.
The effect of verapamil on contractility and on influx of calcium (Ca2+) to the 
rat phrenic nerve-hemidiaphragm preparation was studied in vitro, at rest and 
during electrical stimulation at 0.2-100 Hz.
Calcium content of the bathing 
solution was measured using the Technicon method (SMAC, Sequential Multiple 
Analyser/Computer).
The results showed that verapamil (a) reduced the twitch and 
tetanic contractions in a non-competitive manner, and (b) reduced the influx of 
Ca2+ to the rat hemidiaphragm preparation.
Greater reductions occurred as the 
rate of stimulation increased.
DOI: 10.1093/bja/59.12.1571
PMID: 3426912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Negative chronotropic response to adenosine receptor stimulation in rat right atria after run training <jats:title>Summary</jats:title><jats:p>1. The aim of the present study was to evaluate the potency and maximal responses (E<jats:sub>max</jats:sub>) to the adenosine receptor agonists <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sup>6</jats:sup>‐cyclopentyladenosine (CPA)
 <jats:italic>N</jats:italic>‐ethylcarboxamidoadenosine (NECA) and <jats:italic>N</jats:italic><jats:sup>6</jats:sup>‐(3‐iodobenzyl)‐5′‐<jats:italic>N</jats:italic>‐methylcarbaxamidoadenosine (IB‐MECA) in right atria from trained rats.
We also investigated the interaction between the training bradycardia and the sensitivity of the chronotropic response mediated by adenosine receptor stimulation.</jats:p><jats:p>2.
Animals were submitted to run training for 60 min, 5 days a week, over a period of 8 weeks.
Mean blood pressure and heart rate were measured in conscious animals.
Right atria were isolated and concentration–response curves to CPA, NECA and IB‐MECA were obtained.</jats:p><jats:p>3.
A reduction in heart rate was found in trained rats, indicating that the training programme was successful in inducing physical conditioning.
The three adenosine receptor agonists induced a concentration‐dependent negative chronotropic response.
The rank order of potency and E<jats:sub>max</jats:sub> for the three adenosine receptor agonists was CPA &gt; NECA &gt; IB‐MECA.</jats:p><jats:p>4.
Dynamic exercise for 8 weeks did not alter the E<jats:sub>max</jats:sub> for CPA, NECA and IB‐MECA.
Similarly, the potencies of CPA and NECA were not affected by run training, whereas the potency of IB‐MECA was reduced (6.10 ± 0.09 <jats:italic>vs</jats:italic> 5.66 ± 0.10 for sedentary and trained groups, respectively).</jats:p><jats:p>5.
In conclusion, run training for 8 weeks induced a desensitization of the chronotropic response to IB‐MECA without changing the potency of CPA and NECA.
These findings exclude the participation of adenosine receptors in the training bradycardia.</jats:p>
Haemodynamic effects of high doses of insulin during acute left ventricular failure in dogs 1. Eur Heart J. 1985 May;6(5):451-7. doi:
10.1093/oxfordjournals.eurheartj.a061885.

Haemodynamic effects of high doses of insulin during acute left ventricular 
failure in dogs.

Reikerås O
 Gunnes P, Sørlie D, Ekroth R, Jorde R, Mjøs OD.
Haemodynamic effects of pharmacological doses of insulin during acute ischaemic 
heart failure were studied in 8 dogs.
Severe depression of left ventricular 
function was induced by the injection of 50 micron plastic microspheres into the 
left main coronary artery.
This was demonstrated by a significant increase in 
left ventricular end-diastolic pressure and a significant decrease in the 
maximum rate of left ventricular pressure rise (LVdP/dtmax), stroke volume and 
cardiac output.
Eighty-five minutes after the embolization procedure, 300 IU of 
insulin free of glucagon and calcium was injected as a bolus.
This was followed 
by infusion of glucose and potassium to maintain physiological levels of these 
factors.
Five minutes after insulin administration, there was a significant 
improvement in left ventricular performance as shown by decreased left 
ventricular end-diastolic pressure (P less than 0.01) and increased LVdP/dtmax 
(P less than 0.01), stroke volume (P less than 0.05) and cardiac output (P less 
than 0.05).
A significant reduction in heart rate occurred.
A non-significant 
increase in mean aortic blood pressure and reduction in total peripheral 
resistance were seen.
In conclusion, pharmacological doses of insulin 
significantly improve cardiac pump function during acute ischaemic left 
ventricular failure in dogs.
DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.eurheartj.a061885
PMID: 3899650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of propranolol on drug-induced and physiological glycogenolysis in the liver. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1979;29(8):1104-7.

Effect of propranolol on drug-induced and physiological glycogenolysis in the 
liver.

Pogátsa G
 Dubecz E.

The beta-adrenergic blocking agent propranolol had in itself no notable 
influence on the blood glucose level in rats, but in combination with 
chlorpropamide it considerably delayed and enhanced the hypoglycaemic and liver 
glycogenolysis depressing actions of chlorpropamide.
This effect was still more 
pronounced when the rats were treated in addition to propranolol and 
chlorpropamide with thyroxine or glanduitrine, which in themselves act as 
stimulators of liver glycogenolysis.
The simultaneous administration of 
propranolol and chlorpropamide depressed considerably the liver glycogenolysis 
induced by prolonged fasting and inhibited completely the liver glycogenolysis 
observed after hepatectomy.
The reports available in the literature on 
propranolol-precipitated hypoglycaemia in patients are surveyed and it is 
supposed that the beta-adrenergic blocking agent produces hypoglycaemia 
primarily through the depression of liver glycogenolysis.
This observation 
supports the hypothesis that the adrenergic beta-receptors play an important 
role in the sympathetic control of liver glycogenolysis.
PMID: 583007 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Acute Immobilization Stress and Intraventricular Injection of CRF Suppress Naloxone‐Induced LH Release in Ovariectomized Estrogen‐Primed Rats <jats:p>The present study was undertaken to evaluate the role and possible interaction of the endogenous opioid peptide (EOP) and corticotropin‐releasing factor (CRF) in the acute stress‐induced suppression of gonadotropin secretion in ovariectomized estrogen‐primed rats. An intravenous (i.v.) injection of naloxone (10 or 20 mg/kg)
 an EOP antagonist, significantly elevated serum luteinizing hormone (LH) levels within 10 min in non‐stressed animals.
The naloxone‐induced LH release was completely eliminated when tested 30 min after the onset of acute immobilization.
In a subsequent study, it was found that suppression of the naloxone‐induced LH release occurred as early as 5 min after the stress onset, and was still evident 60 min after the end of a 30‐min period of immobilization.
The effect of naloxone was restored 3 h after liberation of the animal from the 30‐min immobilization.
An intraventricular (i.c.v.)
injection of CRF (1 or 5 μg) also significantly suppressed, in a dose‐related manner, the effect of a subsequent i.v.
injection of naloxone.
However, an i.c.v.
injection of <jats:italic>α</jats:italic>‐helical CRF(9‐41) (25 or 50 μg), a CRF antagonist, prior to immobilization, could not interfere with the suppressive effect of stress on naloxone‐induced LH release.
These results suggest that both acute immobilization stress and CRF can inhibit the LH secretory activity without mediation by EOP neurons.
However, the stress‐related suppression may involve non‐CRF mechanism(s).</jats:p>
[The effect of prednisone and turinabol on the tissue phosphatases in experimental fatty liver in rats]. 1. Z Gesamte Inn Med. 1967 Nov 1;22(21):654-7.

[The effect of prednisone and turinabol on the tissue phosphatases in 
experimental fatty liver in rats].

[Article in German]

Petzold H
 Ziegler A.

PMID: 4233509 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of reserpine on the heart blood supply]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1968 May-Jun;31(3):269-73.

[Effect of reserpine on the heart blood supply].

[Article in Russian]

Chichkanov GG.

PMID: 5698104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of aminopterin on lipid absorption: depression of lipid-reesterifying enzymes 1. Am J Physiol. 1971 Oct;221(4):998-1003. doi: 10.1152/ajplegacy.1971.221.4.998.

Effect of aminopterin on lipid absorption: depression of lipid-reesterifying 
enzymes.

Fromm H
 Rodgers JB Jr.

DOI: 10.1152/ajplegacy.1971.221.4.998
PMID: 5111267 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Synergy between amylin and cholecystokinin for inhibition of food intake in mice 1. Physiol Behav. 1998 Jun 15;64(4):557-61. doi: 10.1016/s0031-9384(98)00110-3.

Synergy between amylin and cholecystokinin for inhibition of food intake in 
mice.

Bhavsar S(1)
 Watkins J, Young A.
Author information:
(1)Amylin Pharmaceuticals Inc, San Diego, CA 92121, USA.
Several gastrointestinal peptides which are secreted in response to nutrients 
have been reported to suppress food intake.
Amylin is a peptide hormone 
co-secreted with insulin from pancreatic beta-cells in response to nutrient 
stimuli.
Cholesystokinin (CCK) is secreted from duodenal and jejunal mucosal 
cells in response to fat and protein.
Amylin and CCK-8 have been reported to 
reduce food intake in rodents when given centrally as well as peripherally.
Amylin injected intraperitoneally (i.p.)
reduced food intake over the subsequent 
30 min in overnight fasted mice by a maximum of 57 +/- 6% with an ED50 of 0.93 
nmol/kg (3.63 microg/kg) +/- 0.34 log units.
On a molar basis, this potency was 
similar to that of CCK-8 (ED50 0.85 nmol/kg (0.97 microg/kg) +/- 0.28 log units; 
p = 0.93) which inhibited food intake by a maximum of 71 +/- 7%.
When amylin and 
CCK-8 were injected i.p.
as an amylin:CCK-8 mixture, immediately before 
presentation of food in overnight fasted mice, food intake in the subsequent 30 
min was reduced by a maximum of 91%, an amount that was greater than that 
producable by i.p.
injection of amylin or CCK-8 alone.
Isobolar analysis 
revealed a marked synergy between amylin and CCK-8 in reducing food intake, such 
that statistically ineffective doses of amylin and CCK, when combined, evoked 
near-maximal inhibition of food intake.
Because the typical physiological event 
is for amylin and CCK both to be secreted in response to mixed meals, the 
synergy between them could indicate a shared role in physiological appetite 
control.
DOI: 10.1016/s0031-9384(98)00110-3
PMID: 9761232 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Diabetes on Uterine Condition
 Decidualization, Vascularization, and Corpus Luteum Function in the Pseudopregnant Rat 1.
Endocrinology.
1988 Feb;122(2):665-72. doi: 10.1210/endo-122-2-665.
Effects of diabetes on uterine condition, decidualization, vascularization, and 
corpus luteum function in the pseudopregnant rat.
Garris DR(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy, Cleveland Research Laboratory, Kansas City, Missouri 
64131.
The effects of alloxan-induced diabetes on uterine decidualization and the 
associated changes in uterine blood flow (UBF) and corpus luteum activity were 
evaluated in rats between days 4-9 of pseudopregnancy (day 0 = ovulation).
Rats 
were made diabetic (D) with a 40 mg/kg injection (iv) of alloxan on day 1 of 
pseudopregnancy.
Saline-treated rats served as controls (C).
Uterine weights 
were depressed in D rats between days 6-7 of pseudopregnancy in association with 
elevated blood glucose levels (greater than 300 mg/dl) relative to control 
values.
UBF rates were also depressed in D rats between days 6-7 of 
pseudopregnancy compared with control values.
Insulin replacement therapy (6 IU 
bovine/day) effectively normalized both uterine weight and UBF in diabetic rats.
Decidual tissue (DT) growth was impaired in D rats between days 7 and 9 of 
pseudopregnancy (DT induction on day 4 of pseudopregnancy) compared with 
controls.
Tissue blood flow rates were severely depressed throughout 
pseudopregnancy in D rats, but insulin treatment normalized both uterine 
parameters to control levels.
Serum progesterone levels were lower in D rats 
than in controls between days 7 and 9 of pseudopregnancy.
Daily insulin 
treatment normalized luteal function to control levels.
The depressed DT weights 
in D rats were mimicked by the experimental reduction of DT blood flow in 
control rats.
These results indicate that the uterine atrophy and poor 
endometrial decidualization that characterized the D rat are accompanied by 
impaired UBF and luteal activity.
These findings suggest that the D-associated 
depression in female reproductive performance is related to the lack of proper 
hormone support of tissue vascular dynamics.
DOI: 10.1210/endo-122-2-665
PMID: 3276500 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[N6-(naphthyl-(1))-methyladenosine
 an adenosine derivative with prolonged coronary effect].
1.
Arzneimittelforschung.
1969 May;19(5):701-4.
[N6-(naphthyl-(1))-methyladenosine, an adenosine derivative with prolonged 
coronary effect].
[Article in German]

Jahn W.

PMID: 5819777 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Restoration of immunogenesis by a complex cobalt (Co-30) compound during streptomycin therapy]. 1. Zh Mikrobiol Epidemiol Immunobiol. 1973 Oct;50(10):69-72.

[Restoration of immunogenesis by a complex cobalt (Co-30) compound during 
streptomycin therapy].

[Article in Russian]

Nikolaev AI
 Nazarmukhamedova MN, Rozgon MI.
PMID: 4799122 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Zur wirkung von strophanthin
 nikotinsäure und kalium-freiem inkubationsmedium auf die durch acth stimulierte lipolyse freier fettzellen 1.
Clin Chim Acta.
1969 May;24(2):267-74. doi: 10.1016/0009-8981(69)90323-4.
[On the action of ouabain-, nicotini acid- and potassium-free incubation media 
on the ACTH stimulated lipolysis in isolated fat cells].
[Article in German]

Schwandt P, Lindlbauer R, Knedel M.

DOI: 10.1016/0009-8981(69)90323-4
PMID: 4306860 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A model for synaptic development regulated by NMDA receptor subunit expression 1. J Comput Neurosci. 2008 Feb;24(1):1-20. doi: 10.1007/s10827-007-0036-8. Epub 
2007 May 22.

A model for synaptic development regulated by NMDA receptor subunit expression.

Kubota S(1)
 Kitajima T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Bio-System Engineering, Yamagata University, 4-3-16 Jonan, 
Yonezawa, Yamagata, 992-8510, Japan.
kubota@yz.yamagata-u.ac.jp

Activation of NMDA receptors (NMDARs) is highly involved in the potentiation and 
depression of synaptic transmission.
NMDARs comprise NR1 and NR2B subunits in 
the neonatal forebrain, while the expression of NR2A subunit is increased over 
time, leading to shortening of NMDAR-mediated synaptic currents.
It has been 
suggested that the developmental switch in the NMDAR subunit composition 
regulates synaptic plasticity, but its physiological role remains unclear.
In 
this study, we examine the effects of the NMDAR subunit switch on the 
spike-timing-dependent plasticity and the synaptic weight dynamics and 
demonstrate that the subunit switch contributes to inducing two consecutive 
processes-the potentiation of weak synapses and the induction of the competition 
between them-at an adequately rapid rate.
Regulation of NMDAR subunit expression 
can be considered as a mechanism that promotes rapid and stable growth of 
immature synapses.
DOI: 10.1007/s10827-007-0036-8
PMID: 18202921 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Thallium-induced dephosphorylation of a phosphorylated intermediate of the (sodium + thallium-activated) ATPase 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1969 May 27;178(3):630-3. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2744(69)90233-2.

Thallium-induced dephosphorylation of a phosphorylated intermediate of the 
(sodium plus thallium-activated) ATPase.

Inturrisi CE.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2744(69)90233-2
PMID: 4239444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Functional reorganization of the thyroid gland in experimental tuberculosis and its antibacterial therapy]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1969 Nov;68(11):30-3.

[Functional reorganization of the thyroid gland in experimental tuberculosis and 
its antibacterial therapy].

[Article in Russian]

Pashchenko SI
 Pashchenko AE.
PMID: 5397936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Protein and Insulin on Linoleic Acid Desaturation of Normal and Diabetic Rats 1. J Nutr. 1971 Aug;101(8):1075-83. doi: 10.1093/jn/101.8.1075.

Effect of protein and insulin on linoleic acid desaturation of normal and 
diabetic rats.

Peluffo RO
 De Gomez Dumm NT, De Alaniz MJ, Brenner RR.
DOI: 10.1093/jn/101.8.1075
PMID: 5565094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Virogenetic and optogenetic mechanisms to define potential therapeutic targets in psychiatric disorders 1. Neuropharmacology. 2012 Jan;62(1):89-100. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.09.009.  Epub 2011 Sep 17.

Virogenetic and optogenetic mechanisms to define potential therapeutic targets 
in psychiatric disorders.

Han MH(1)
 Friedman AK.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Systems Therapeutics, Friedman Brain 
Institute, Mount Sinai School of Medicine, New York, NY, USA.
ming-hu.han@mssm.edu

A continuously increasing body of knowledge shows that the brain is an extremely 
complex neural network and single neurons possess their own complicated 
interactive signaling pathways.
Such complexity of the nervous system makes it 
increasingly difficult to investigate the functions of specific neural 
components such as genes, proteins, transcription factors, neurons and nuclei in 
the brain.
Technically, it has been even more of a significant challenge to 
identify the molecular and cellular adaptations that are both sufficient and 
necessary to underlie behavioral functions in health and disease states.
Defining such neural adaptations is a critical step to identify the potential 
therapeutic targets within the complex neural network that are beneficial to 
treat psychiatric disorders.
Recently, the new development and extensive 
application of in vivo viral-mediated gene transfer (virogenetics) and optical 
manipulation of specific neurons or selective neural circuits in freely-moving 
animals (optogenetics) make it feasible, through loss- and gain-of-function 
approaches, to reliably define sufficient and necessary neuroadaptations in the 
behavioral models of psychiatric disorders, including drug addiction, 
depression, anxiety and bipolar disorders.
In this article, we focus on recent 
studies that successfully employ these advanced virogenetic and optogenetic 
techniques as a powerful tool to identify potential targets in the brain, and to 
provide highly useful information in the development of novel therapeutic 
strategies for psychiatric disorders.
This article is part of a Special Issue 
entitled 'Anxiety and Depression'.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.09.009
PMCID: PMC3205991
PMID: 21945288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression of the recurrent inhibition of extensor motoneurons by the action of group II afferents 1. Brain Res. 1977 Jan 28;120(3):459-68. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(77)90399-7.

Depression of the recurrent inhibition of extensor motoneurons by the action of 
group II afferents.

Fromm C
 Haase J, Wolf E.

The influence of varying the muscular afferent fiber input on both the normal 
firing rate (Fn) and the amount of recurrent inhibition (Fn-Fi) induced by a 
constant ventral root stimulation was investigated on tonic extensor motoneurons 
recorded from ventral root filaments in decerebrate cats.
The afferent input was 
varied by graded electrical stimulation of the gastrocnemius nerves and by 
vibrating the triceps surae muscle (100 mum amplitude).
When the input consisted 
solely of impulses in Ia afferents, as was the case during vibration, the mean 
recurrent inhibition Fn-Fi was 2.3 times greater than during nerve tetanization 
at 1.8 times threshold of group I (TI).
This strength generally excited all 
group I and some low-threshold group II afferents.
Between 1.8 TI and 8 TI, 
Fn-Fi decreased by some 50%.
The average Fn increased slightly and motoneurons 
with a phasic discharge pattern were recruited when the stimulus strength was 
raised so as to excite group II afferents; these cells were never recruited 
during vibration and nerve tetanization at 1.8 TI.
The results indicate the 
possibility of a disinhibitory action of secondary muscle spindle afferents on 
extensor motoneurons by reducing the recurrent inhibition.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(77)90399-7
PMID: 832135 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fluoxetine attenuates morphine-induced locomotion and blocks morphine-sensitization 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1997 Oct 22;337(2-3):161-4. doi:
10.1016/s0014-2999(97)01308-3.

Fluoxetine attenuates morphine-induced locomotion and blocks 
morphine-sensitization.

Sills TL(1)
 Fletcher PJ.
Author information:
(1)Biopsychology Section, Clarke Institute of Psychiatry, Toronto, Ontario, 
Canada.
terrence@psych.toronto.edu

Repeated morphine treatments result in sensitization, an increase in the 
efficacy of morphine to stimulate locomotor activity.
study examined the effects 
of increasing serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine, 5-HT) transmission on 
morphine-sensitization.
For five days rats were administered saline or 5.0 mg/kg 
fluoxetine prior to treatment with saline or 5.0 mg/kg morphine.
Twenty-one days 
later, rats were tested for their locomotor response to 2.0 mg/kg morphine.
Fluoxetine treatment attenuated the locomotor activating effect of acute 
morphine treatments and blocked the sensitized response to the morphine 
challenge.
These results indicate that increased 5-HT transmission attenuates 
the locomotor stimulating effects of morphine and prevents the development of 
morphine-sensitization.
DOI: 10.1016/s0014-2999(97)01308-3
PMID: 9430410 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
MICROELECTRODE STUDY OF SPREADING DEPRESSION (SD) IN FROG RETINA 1. Jpn J Physiol. 1976;26(2):203-17. doi: 10.2170/jjphysiol.26.203.

Microelectrode study of spreading depression (SD) in frog retina--general 
observations of field potential associated with SD.

Mori S
 Miller WH, Tomita T.

Using microelectrodes, the field potential change associated with SD (SDP) was 
recorded from frog retinas conditioned with Cl-free Ringer's.
In such retinas, 
SDP was induced by light or chemical agents such as glutamate, aspartate and K+.
The chemicals, when applied iontophoretically, produced a local graded response 
which eventually triggered SDP.
A potential similar to the local response to 
chemicals was often discerned on the rising phase of SDPs produced by light or 
occurring spontaneously.
The SDP was maximal across an innermost retinal layer 
50 mum or less in thickness with the intraretinal polarity predominantly 
negative, indicating that the major sink of SDP is in the inner plexiform layer.
The influence of SDP on the receptor potential was relatively small, but the 
other components completely disappeared at the beginning of SDP, recovering 
gradually thereafter.
Concomitantly, a strong depolarization occurred in the 
ganglion cells.
Stimulation of the optic nerve could induce SDP, but nerve 
impulse activity is not important for SDP because tetrodotoxin was unable to 
prevent SDP due to light or chemical agents.
DOI: 10.2170/jjphysiol.26.203
PMID: 1085830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cyclizing compounds. IV. Tertiary N-(2-(3
4,5-trimethoxybenzoyloxy)ethyl)-N-haloalkylamines with hemicholinium-like activity.
1.
Acta Pharm Suec.
1974 Sep;11(4):401-9.
Cyclizing compounds.
IV.
Tertiary 
N-(2-(3,4,5-trimethoxybenzoyloxy)ethyl)-N-haloalkylamines with 
hemicholinium-like activity.
Lindborg B, Johansson JG, Dahlbom R.

PMID: 4412690 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long-Term Behavioral Changes After Cessation of Chronic Antidepressant Treatment in Olfactory Bulbectomized Rats 1. Biol Psychiatry. 2007 Apr 15;61(8):990-5. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.08.032.
 Epub 2006 Dec 4.

Long-term behavioral changes after cessation of chronic antidepressant treatment 
in olfactory bulbectomized rats.

Breuer ME(1)
 Groenink L, Oosting RS, Westenberg HG, Olivier B.
Author information:
(1)Utrecht University, Utrecht Institute for Pharmaceutical Sciences, Department 
of Psychopharmacology, University Medical Center Utrecht, Utrecht, The 
Netherlands.
M.E.Breuer@pharm.uu.nl

BACKGROUND: Olfactory bulbectomy (OBX) in rats causes several behavioral and 
neurochemical central nervous system changes, reminiscent of symptoms of human 
depression.
Moreover, depression-like behavior after OBX can be reversed with 
antidepressant drugs.
However, the lasting effects of these antidepressant drugs 
on behavior after cessation of treatment have never been studied.
METHODS: Male rats received OBX or sham surgery.
After recovery, animals 
received 14 consecutive daily doses of imipramine (20 mg/kg), escitalopram (5 
and 10 mg/kg), or vehicle.
Animals were tested in an open field after acute, 
sub-chronic, and chronic injections, as well as 1, 2, 6, and 10 weeks after 
cessation of treatment.
RESULTS: The OBX-induced hyperactivity was normalized after sub-chronic 
administration of imipramine and escitalopram.
Two weeks after treatment, 
activity of OBX animals was comparable to sham-treated animals, but after 6 
weeks, OBX animals treated with both doses of escitalopram had returned to 
pre-treatment hyperactivity levels.
The OBX animals treated with the high 
imipramine dose (20 mg/kg) retained activity levels comparable to sham-treated 
animals until 10 weeks after cessation of treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: Chronic but not acute administration of imipramine and escitalopram 
normalizes OBX-induced hyperactivity.
This effect continues for up to 10 weeks 
after cessation of treatment in a dose dependant manner.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2006.08.032
PMID: 17141743 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cholestatic steroid hormones inhibit taurocholate uptake into isolated rat hepatocytes 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1977 Dec 15;26(24):2433-7. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(77)90453-1.

Cholestatic steroid hormones inhibit taurocholate uptake into isolated rat 
hepatocytes.

Schwarz LR
 Schwenk M, Pfaff E, Greim H.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(77)90453-1
PMID: 597331 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Novel mechanistic insights into treadmill exercise based rescue of social defeat-induced anxiety-like behavior and memory impairment in rats 1. Physiol Behav. 2014 May 10;130:135-44. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.04.011.
Epub  2014 Apr 13.

Novel mechanistic insights into treadmill exercise based rescue of social 
defeat-induced anxiety-like behavior and memory impairment in rats.

Patki G(1)
 Solanki N(1), Atrooz F(1), Ansari A(1), Allam F(1), Jannise B(1), 
Maturi J(1), Salim S(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Department of Pharmacological and Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of 
Houston, TX, USA.
Electronic address: ssalim@uh.edu.
Social defeat (SD) induced stress causes physiological and behavioral deficits 
in rodents, including depression and anxiety-like behaviors, as well as memory 
impairment.
Anxiolytic and mood elevating effects of physical exercise are also 
known.
However, rescue effect of physical exercise in social defeat-induced 
anxiety, depression or memory impairment has not been addressed.
The role of 
epigenetic mechanisms that potentially contribute to these rescue or protective 
effects is also not known.
The present study investigated the effect of moderate 
treadmill exercise on anxiety-like behavior and memory function in rats 
subjected to SD using a modified version of the resident-intruder model for 
social stress (defeat).
Changes in histone acetylation and histone-modifying 
enzymes were examined in hippocampus, amygdala and frontal cortex which are 
considered critical for anxiety, depression and cognition.
Sprague Dawley rats 
were randomly assigned in four groups; control, exercised, social defeat, social 
defeat and exercise.
At the end of the SD or control exposure lasting 30 min 
daily for 7 days, one group of SD rats was subjected to treadmill exercise for 2 
weeks, whereas the other SD group was handled without exercise.
Anxiety-like 
behavior tests and radial arm water maze test suggested that moderate treadmill 
exercise rescued social defeat induced anxiety-like behavior and memory 
impairment.
Moreover, exercise normalized SD-induced increase in oxidative 
stress, most likely by adjusting antioxidant response.
Our data suggests 
involvement of epigenetic mechanisms including histone acetylation of H3 and 
modulation of methyl-CpG-binding in the hippocampus that might contribute to the 
rescue effects of exercise in SD-induced behavioral deficits in rats.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.04.011
PMCID: PMC4416646
PMID: 24732411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Statement of Interest None
A Comparison of the Cerebral Protective Effects of Isoflurane and Mild Hypothermia in a Model of Incomplete Forebrain Ischemia in the Rat 1. Anesthesiology. 1992 Feb;76(2):221-8. doi: 10.1097/00000542-199202000-00011.

A comparison of the cerebral protective effects of isoflurane and mild 
hypothermia in a model of incomplete forebrain ischemia in the rat.

Sano T(1)
 Drummond JC, Patel PM, Grafe MR, Watson JC, Cole DJ.
Author information:
(1)University of California, San Diego, La Jolla 92093-0629.
Comment in
    Anesthesiology.
1992 Feb;76(2):161-4.
The present study was undertaken to examine the cerebral protective properties 
attributed to isoflurane and at the same time to compare its protective effects 
with those of mild hypothermia (temperature reduction by 3 degrees C).
Twenty-one fasted Wistar-Kyoto rats were assigned to one of three groups (n = 
7); 1.3 MAC (end-tidal) isoflurane-normothermia (pericranial temperature 38.0 
degrees C), 1.3 MAC halothane-normothermia, and 1.3 MAC halothane-hypothermia 
(pericranial temperature 35.0 degrees C during ischemia).
In each animal the 
trachea was intubated and the lungs were mechanically ventilated.
Each animal 
was subjected to temporary incomplete forebrain ischemia induced by 10 min of 
bilateral carotid artery occlusion with simultaneous hypotension (mean arterial 
pressure 35 mmHg) induced by trimetaphan and blood withdrawal.
After a 3-day 
survival period, perfusion-fixation was performed, and two blinded observers 
assessed histopathologic injury according to a four-point scale (0 = no damage; 
1 = less than 10% of neurons damaged; 2 = 10-50% damaged; and 3 = greater than 
50% damaged).
The assessment was performed at two points in the rostrocaudal 
axis chosen to permit evaluation of regions with varying levels of ischemic 
damage.
In the rostral sections, in the isoflurane- and halothane-normothermia 
groups, moderate to severe injury was observed in striatum, cerebral cortex, 
hippocampus (CA1 and CA3 areas), and reticular nucleus of the thalamus (e.g., 
the median scores for the CA1 area were 3 in both the halothane-hypothermia and 
the isoflurane-normothermia groups), and there were no differences between the 
two groups.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1097/00000542-199202000-00011
PMID: 1736699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Medetomidine with Ketamine and Bupivacaine for Epidural Analgesia in Buffaloes 1. Vet Res Commun. 2005 Jan;29(1):1-18. doi: 10.1023/b:verc.0000046736.78612.f7.

Medetomidine with ketamine and bupivacaine for epidural analgesia in buffaloes.

Singh V(1)
 Amarpal, Kinjavdekar P, Aithal HP, Pratap K.

Author information:
(1)Division of Surgery, Indian Veterinary Research Institute, Izatnagar (UP), 
243 122, India.
The efficacy of ketamine and bupivacaine in enhancing the epidural analgesia 
induced by medetomidine was evaluated in 10 buffalo calves utilized repeatedly 
after a gap of 10 days so that each drug combination was tested in 4 randomly 
selected animals.
In group A, medetomidine (15 microg/kg), in group B ketamine 
(2.0 mg/kg), in group C bupivacaine (0.125 mg/kg), in group D medetomidine and 
ketamine (15 microg/kg and 2.0 mg/kg), and in group E medetomidine and 
bupivacaine (15 microg/kg and 0.125 mg/kg) was administered epidurally.
Onset of 
analgesia was significantly earlier in animals of groups B and D compared to the 
animals of groups A, C and E. Medetomidine alone or in combination with 
ketamine/bupivacaine produced complete analgesia of the tail, perineum, inguinal 
region and upper parts of hind limbs.
Ketamine produced a very short duration of 
complete analgesia at the tail and perineum.
Bupivacaine alone produced only 
mild to moderate analgesia.
Both ketamine and bupivacaine prolonged the duration 
of analgesia.
Motor incoordination was mild to moderate in animals of all the 
groups, but animals remained standing throughout the period of observation.
Animals of groups A, D and E showed mild to moderate sedation during the 
observation period.
Ruminal movements decreased nonsignificantly in animals of 
groups A and E. Mild salivation was observed in animals of all the groups except 
group C. Significant decrease in heart rate (HR) was recorded after epidural 
administration of medetomidine or bupivacaine; however, ketamine caused short 
duration of tachycardia.
The administration of ketamine with medetomidine caused 
lesser decrease in HR compared to medetomidine alone or in combination with 
bupivacaine.
Significant fall in respiratory rate (RR) was recorded after 
epidural administration of medetomidine or bupivacaine alone, but an increase in 
RR was recorded after ketamine administration.
The fall in RR was less 
pronounced in animals in which medetomidine was used with ketamine compared to 
the animals in which medetomidine was used alone or in combination with 
bupivacaine.
Mean arterial pressure (MAP) decreased and central venous pressure 
(CVP) increased significantly after epidural administration of medetomidine in 
combination with ketamine or bupivacaine.
The ECG changes included tall T wave, 
QS pattern, RS pattern and ST elevation and heart blocks at different intervals, 
which were more frequent and pronounced in animals given bupivacaine with 
medetomidine.
It can be concluded that epidural administration of medetomidine 
can produce complete analgesia of the tail, perineum, inguinal region and upper 
hind limbs in buffaloes.
However, significant depression of cardiovascular 
parameters was recorded.
Administration of ketamine along with medetomidine 
resulted in significantly early onset and slightly longer duration of analgesia 
with lesser cardiopulmonary side-effects compared to medetomidine alone or 
medetomidine with bupivacaine.
Addition of ketamine to medetomidine thus seems 
to be useful for producing epidural analgesia; however, addition of bupivacaine 
failed to provide any advantage over medetomidine alone.
DOI: 10.1023/b:verc.0000046736.78612.f7
PMID: 15727287 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Cell adhesion in neoplastic cells and syngeneic fibroblasts of the rat: effect of progesterone and estradiol]. 1. Boll Soc Ital Biol Sper. 1991 Dec;67(12):1031-7.

[Cell adhesion in neoplastic cells and syngeneic fibroblasts of the rat: effect 
of progesterone and estradiol].

[Article in Italian]

Tilloca G(1)
 Meloni MA, Sciola L, Pippia P.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Fisiologia Generale e Chimica Biologica, Università di Sassari.
Recent advances in the study on the importance of steroid receptors in the 
treatment of hormone-responsive tumors established the relationship between 
plasma membrane and the first steps of the cellular response to the endocrine 
stimulus.
We have therefore found interesting to study the influence of estrogen 
and progesterone on cell adhesion of neoplastic (SGS/3A) and normal syngeneic 
(FG) cells.
We demonstrated the presence of a nuclear estrogenic and a cytosolic 
progestin receptor in the SGS/3A cells.
In syngeneic fibroblasts both receptors 
are absent.
Cell adhesion kinetics obtained determining the percent of single 
labeled cells with 3H-leucine adhering to confluent monolayer (cell-cell 
adhesion) showed that the physiological concentrations of estradiol and 
progesterone induce an inhibition of cell-substratum adhesion (25-30%) in 
neoplastic cells, but do not influence cell-cell adhesion.
In FG cells the two 
hormones cause an increase of cell-substratum adhesion (35-40%), but do not 
influence cell-cell adhesion.
Results suggest that FG cells, although lacking 
cytoplasmic or nuclear receptors for estradiol and progesterone, probably have 
other steroid-receptive molecules involved in adhesive processes on their 
cell-surface.
PMID: 1840794 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressants and the resilience to early-life stress in inbred mouse strains 1. Pharmacogenet Genomics. 2011 Dec;21(12):779-89. doi: 
10.1097/FPC.0b013e32834b3f35.

Antidepressants and the resilience to early-life stress in inbred mouse strains.

Binder E(1)
 Malki K, Paya-Cano JL, Fernandes C, Aitchison KJ, Mathé AA, Sluyter 
F, Schalkwyk LC.
Author information:
(1)INSERM U862, Avenir group Physiopathology of Energy Balance and Obesity, 
Université de Bordeaux 2, Bordeaux, France.
RATIONALE: Selecting an effective treatment for patients with major depressive 
disorder is a perpetual problem for psychiatrists.
It is of particular interest 
to explore the interaction between genetic predisposition and environmental 
factors.
OBJECTIVES: Mouse inbred strains vary in baseline performance in 
depression-related behaviour tests, which were originally validated as tests of 
antidepressant response.
Therefore, we investigated interactions between 
environmental stress, genotype, and drug response in a multifactorial behaviour 
study.
METHOD: Our study design included four inbred mouse strains (129S1/SvlmJ, 
C57LB/6J, DBA/2J and FVB/NJ) of both sexes, two subjected to environmental 
manipulations (maternal separation and unpredictable chronic mild stress) and 
two representative of treatment with antidepressants (escitalopram and 
nortryptiline vs. vehicle).
The mice treated with antidepressants were further 
divided into those administered acute (1 day) and subchronic (14 days) regimes, 
giving 144 experimental groups in all, each with at least seven animals.
All 
animals were tested using the Porsolt forced-swim test (FST) and the hole-board 
test.
RESULTS: Despite a 24-h maternal separation (MS) or a 14-day unpredictable 
chronic mild stress protocol, most animals seemed to be resilient to the stress 
induced.
One compelling finding is the long-lasting, strain-specific effect of 
MS resulting in an increased depression-like behaviour in the Porsolt FST and 
elevated anxiety-related behaviour in the hole-board test seen in 129S1/SvImJ 
mice.
Nortriptyline was effective in reversing the effect of MS in the FST in 
129S1/SvlmJ male mice.
CONCLUSION: A single 24-h maternal separation of pups from their mother on 
postnatal day 9 is a sufficient insult to result in a depression-like phenotype 
in adult 129S1/SvImJ mice but not in C57LB/6 J, DBA/2 J, and FVB/NJ mice.
DOI: 10.1097/FPC.0b013e32834b3f35
PMID: 22016050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Prevalence of Cytauxzoon felis infection in healthy cats from enzootic areas in Arkansas
 Missouri, and Oklahoma 1.
Parasit Vectors.
2015 Jan 8;8:13. doi: 10.1186/s13071-014-0618-z.
Prevalence of Cytauxzoon felis infection in healthy cats from enzootic areas in 
Arkansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma.
Rizzi TE(1), Reichard MV(2), Cohn LA(3), Birkenheuer AJ(4), Taylor JD(5), 
Meinkoth JH(6).
Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK, USA.
theresa.rizzi@okstate.edu.
(2)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK, USA.
mason.reichard@okstate.edu.
(3)Department of Veterinary Medicine and Surgery, University of Missouri, 
Columbia, MO, USA.
CohnL@missouri.edu.
(4)College of Veterinary Medicine, North Carolina State University, Raleigh, NC, 
USA.
ajbirken@ncsu.edu.
(5)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK, USA.
jared.d.taylor@okstate.edu.
(6)Department of Veterinary Pathobiology, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater, 
OK, USA.
james.meinkoth@okstate.edu.
BACKGROUND: Infection with Cytauxzoon felis in domestic cats can cause fever, 
lethargy, depression, inappetence, icterus, and often death.
With a high 
mortality rate, cytauxzoonosis was historically considered a fatal disease.
Within the last 15 years, cats with or without treatment have been recognized as 
chronically infected survivors of C. felis infection.
Our objective was to 
determine the prevalence of C. felis in healthy domestic cats from Arkansas, 
Missouri, and Oklahoma.
METHODS: Infection with C. felis was determined using DNA extracted from 
anticoagulated whole blood and PCR amplification using C. felis-specific 
primers.
Chi-square, Fisher's exact tests, and odds ratios were used to compare 
proportions of cats infected with C. felis.
RESULTS: Blood samples were collected from 902 healthy domestic cats between 
October 2008 and April 2012.
DNA from Cytauxzoon felis was detected in 56 of 902 
(6.2%; 95% confidence interval, 4.7-7.9) samples.
The highest prevalence of C. 
felis infection (15.5%; 10.3-21.7) was observed in cats from Arkansas, followed 
by cats from Missouri (12.9%; 6.1-24.0), and cats from Oklahoma (3.4%; 2.2-5.1).
Cats sampled in Arkansas and Missouri were 5.1 and 4.2, respectively, times more 
likely to be chronically infected with C. felis than cats from Oklahoma.
CONCLUSIONS: Infection with C. felis is common in domestic cats through 
Arkansas, Missouri, and Oklahoma.
The high prevalence of C. felis reported 
herein suggests that infected domestic cats are likely reservoirs of infection 
for naive felines.
The high prevalence of C. felis substantiates the importance 
for the use of approved acaricides on cats to prevent cytauxzoonosis.
DOI: 10.1186/s13071-014-0618-z
PMCID: PMC4297400
PMID: 25566776 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ranitidine inhibits adrenergic but not nonadrenergic noncholinergic transmission in the rat isolated anococcygeus muscle. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1993 Jan-Feb;321:92-102.

Ranitidine inhibits adrenergic but not nonadrenergic noncholinergic transmission 
in the rat isolated anococcygeus muscle.

Gwee MC(1)
 Cheah LS.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Faculty of Medicine, National University of 
Singapore.
The effects of ranitidine on adrenergic and nonadrenergic noncholinergic 
transmission in the rat isolated anococcygeus muscle and on the contractile 
responses of the muscle to noradrenaline, potassium chloride, 
5-hydroxytryptamine and carbachol were investigated.
Ranitidine (2-8 mM) 
produced a concentration-dependent and readily reversible inhibition of motor 
(excitatory) responses of the anococcygeus muscle evoked via field stimulation 
(20-30 V, 10 Hz x 10 sec, 1 msec pulse width, every 2 min), whereas the 
contractile response of the anococcygeus muscle to exogenous noradrenaline (3 
microM) was potentiated by 57 +/- 3.7%; the contractile response to potassium 
chloride (50 mM) was only slightly decreased, whereas the responses to carbachol 
(3 microM) or 5-hydroxytryptamine (30 microM) were completely inhibited by 
ranitidine (8 mM).
When the tone of the muscle was raised by noradrenaline (3 
microM) after complete inhibition of the motor responses by ranitidine (8 mM), 
field stimulation produced relaxant (inhibitory) responses which were inhibited 
by tetrodotoxin (2 microM) or NG-nitro-L-arginine methylester (50 microM).
Similar results were obtained with guanethidine (0.5-3 microM) on adrenergic and 
non-adrenergic noncholinergic transmission.
The results clearly show that 
ranitidine can selectively inhibit adrenergic transmission in the anococcygeus 
muscle with consequent unmasking of nonadrenergic noncholinergic transmission; 
ranitidine can also produce a super-sensitivity-type response of the muscle to 
exogenous noradrenaline but not to potassium chloride, carbachol or 
5-hydroxytryptamine.
Thus, the inhibition of adrenergic transmission by 
ranitidine in the rat isolated anococcygeus muscle closely resembles the action 
of guanethidine on adrenergic transmission.
PMID: 8391790 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mitochondrial function in heart and kidney of spontaneously hypertensive rats: influence of captopril treatment 1. Gen Physiol Biophys. 2010 Jun;29(2):203-7.

Mitochondrial function in heart and kidney of spontaneously hypertensive rats: 
influence of captopril treatment.

Mujkosová J(1)
 Ulicná O, Waczulíková I, Vlkovicová J, Vancová O, Ferko M, Polák 
S, Ziegelhöffer A.
Author information:
(1)Institute for Heart Research, Centre of Excellence for Cardiovascular 
Research, Slovak Academy of Sciences, 840 05 Bratislava, Slovakia.
jana.mujkosova@gmail.com

Effect of captopril treatment on capability of heart and kidney mitochondria to 
produce ATP was investigated in spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR).
Heart 
mitochondria from SHR responded to hypertension with tendency to compensate the 
elevated energy demands of cardiac cells by moderate increase in mitochondrial 
Mg2+-ATPase activity, membrane fluidity (MF) and in majority of functional 
parameters of the mitochondria (p>0.05).
Significant increase exhibited only the 
oxygen consumption (QO2; p<0.01-0.001) and oxidative phosphorylation rate (OPR; 
p<0.003) with glutamate+malate (GLUT+MAL) as substrates.
Lowering the blood 
pressure (p<0.02) captopril also eliminated the above compensatory response and 
impaired the oxidative ATP production by decreasing OPR (p<0.001).
Kidney 
mitochondria of SHR experienced serious disarrangement in parameters of 
oxidative ATP production: increase in Mg2+-ATPase activity (p<0.05) but, also 
scattered QO2 values (p<0.03-0.01) leading to decrease in OPR and the ADP:O 
(p<0.05-0.01) values with both GLUT+MAL and succinate as substrates.
Captopril 
treatment does not alleviated but even worsened the above alterations.
Mg2+-ATPase became also decreased and the depression of ADP:O became aggravated 
(p<0.0001).
PMID: 20577032 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Endocannabinoid-Mediated Long-Term Depression of Afferent Excitatory Synapses in Hippocampal Pyramidal Cells and GABAergic Interneurons <jats:p>Although endocannabinoids have emerged as essential retrograde messengers in several forms of synaptic plasticity
 it remains controversial whether they mediate long-term depression (LTD) of glutamatergic synapses onto excitatory and inhibitory neurons in the hippocampus.
Here, we show that parvalbumin- and somatostatin/metabotropic glutamate receptor 1<jats:sub>a</jats:sub>(mGlu<jats:sub>1a</jats:sub>)-positive GABAergic interneurons express diacylglycerol lipase-α (DGL-α), a synthesizing enzyme of the endocannabinoid 2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), albeit at lower levels than principal cells.
Moreover, this lipase accumulates postsynaptically around afferent excitatory synapses in all three cell types.
To address the role of retrograde 2-AG signaling in LTD, we investigated two forms: (1) produced by postsynaptic spiking paired with subsequent presynaptic stimulation or (2) induced by group I mGlu activation by (<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>)-3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine (DHPG).
Neither form of LTD was evoked in the presence of the mGlu<jats:sub>5</jats:sub>antagonist MPEP [2-methyl-6-(phenylethynyl)-pyridine], the DGL inhibitor THL [<jats:italic>N</jats:italic>-formyl-<jats:sc>l</jats:sc>-leucine (1<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>)-1-[[(2<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>,3<jats:italic>S</jats:italic>)-3-hexyl-4-oxo-2-oxetanyl]methyl]dodecyl ester], or the intracellularly applied Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>chelator BAPTA in CA1 pyramidal cells, fast-spiking interneurons (representing parvalbumin-containing cells) and interneurons projecting to stratum lacunosum-moleculare (representing somatostatin/mGlu<jats:sub>1a</jats:sub>-expressing interneurons).
Both forms of LTD were completely absent in CB<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>cannabinoid receptor knock-out mice, whereas pharmacological blockade of CB<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>led to inconsistent results.
Notably, in accordance with their lower DGL-α level, a higher stimulation frequency or higher DHPG concentration was required for LTD induction in interneurons compared with pyramidal cells.
These findings demonstrate that hippocampal principal cells and interneurons produce endocannabinoids to mediate LTD in a qualitatively similar, but quantitatively different manner.
The shifted induction threshold implies that endocannabinoid-LTD contributes to cortical information processing during distinct network activity patterns in a cell type-specific manner.</jats:p>
Control of Inhibitory Synaptic Outputs by Low Excitability of Axon Terminals Revealed by Direct Recording 1. Neuron. 2015 Mar 18;85(6):1273-88. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.013. Epub
2015  Feb 26.

Control of inhibitory synaptic outputs by low excitability of axon terminals 
revealed by direct recording.

Kawaguchi SY(1)
 Sakaba T(2).
Author information:
(1)Graduate School of Brain Science, Doshisha University, Kizugawa-Shi, Kyoto, 
619-0225, Japan.
Electronic address: skawaguc@mail.doshisha.ac.jp.
(2)Graduate School of Brain Science, Doshisha University, Kizugawa-Shi, Kyoto, 
619-0225, Japan.
Electronic address: tsakaba@mail.doshisha.ac.jp.
Comment in
    Neuron.
2015 Mar 18;85(6):1149-51. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.03.006.
An axon is thought to faithfully conduct action potentials to its terminals.
However, many features of the axon and axon terminals, especially at inhibitory 
synapses, remain unknown.
By directly recording from the axon and terminal of a 
cultured cerebellar Purkinje cell (PC), we demonstrate that low membrane 
excitability of axon terminals shapes synaptic output.
Simultaneous measurements 
of presynaptic capacitance and evoked IPSCs revealed PC axon terminals contained 
large readily releasable synaptic vesicles that exhibited a low release 
probability.
Nevertheless, IPSCs evoked by stimulating a PC soma underwent 
frequency-dependent depression.
Direct axonal recordings showed that 
high-frequency action potentials were faithfully conducted over axonal 
bifurcations but were attenuated around terminals.
Sparse Na(+) channels 
relative to enriched voltage-gated K(+) channels in terminals caused short-term 
depression of IPSCs by reducing Ca(2+) influx.
Together with confirmation in 
slice recordings, our findings reveal a presynaptic mechanism that shapes 
short-term synaptic depression without depleting releasable vesicles.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.02.013
PMID: 25728570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Interactions of Dipyridamole and Adenosine on Platelet Aggregation 1. Nature. 1969 Mar 22;221(5186):1162-4. doi: 10.1038/2211162a0.

Interactions of dipyridamole and adenosine on platelet aggregation.

Philp RB
 Lemieux JP.
DOI: 10.1038/2211162a0
PMID: 4975285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sensory Responses during Sleep in Primate Primary and Secondary Auditory Cortex <jats:p>Most sensory stimuli do not reach conscious perception during sleep. It has been thought that the thalamus prevents the relay of sensory information to cortex during sleep
 but the consequences for cortical responses to sensory signals in this physiological state remain unclear.
We recorded from two auditory cortical areas downstream of the thalamus in naturally sleeping marmoset monkeys.
Single neurons in primary auditory cortex either increased or decreased their responses during sleep compared with wakefulness.
In lateral belt, a secondary auditory cortical area, the response modulation was also bidirectional and showed no clear systematic depressive effect of sleep.
When averaged across neurons, sound-evoked activity in these two auditory cortical areas was surprisingly well preserved during sleep.
Neural responses to acoustic stimulation were present during both slow-wave and rapid-eye movement sleep, were repeatedly observed over multiple sleep cycles, and demonstrated similar discharge patterns to the responses recorded during wakefulness in the same neuron.
Our results suggest that the thalamus is not as effective a gate for the flow of sensory information as previously thought.
At the cortical stage, a novel pattern of activation/deactivation appears across neurons.
Because the neural signal reaches as far as secondary auditory cortex, this leaves open the possibility of altered sensory processing of auditory information during sleep.</jats:p>
mGluR2 acts through inhibitory Gα subunits to regulate transmission and long-term plasticity at hippocampal mossy fiber-CA3 synapses <jats:p>
            Presynaptic inhibitory G protein-coupled receptors play a critical role in regulating transmission at a number of synapses in the central and peripheral nervous system. We generated transgenic mice that express a constitutively active form of an inhibitory Gα subunit to examine the molecular mechanisms underlying the actions of one such receptor
 metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) 2, at mossy fiber-CA3 synapses in the hippocampus.
mGluR2 participates in at least three types of mossy fiber synaptic plasticity, (
            <jats:italic>i</jats:italic>
            ) transient suppression of synaptic transmission, (
            <jats:italic>ii</jats:italic>
            ) long-term depression (LTD), and (
            <jats:italic>iii</jats:italic>
            ) inhibition of long-term potentiation (LTP), and we find that inhibitory Gα signaling is sufficient to account for the actions of mGluR2 in each.
The fact that constitutively active Gα
            <jats:sub>i2</jats:sub>
            occludes the transient suppression of synaptic transmission by mGluR2, while enhancing LTD, suggests further that these two forms of plasticity are expressed via different mechanisms.
In addition, the LTP deficit observed in constitutively active Gα
            <jats:sub>i2</jats:sub>
            -expressing mice suggests that mGluR2 activation may serve as a metaplastic switch to permit the induction of LTD by inhibiting LTP.
</jats:p>
Cardiomyocyte Toll-like receptor 4 is involved in heart dysfunction following septic shock or myocardial ischemia 1. J Mol Cell Cardiol. 2010 Jun;48(6):1236-44. doi: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.02.020. 
Epub 2010 Mar 4.

Cardiomyocyte Toll-like receptor 4 is involved in heart dysfunction following 
septic shock or myocardial ischemia.

Fallach R(1)
 Shainberg A, Avlas O, Fainblut M, Chepurko Y, Porat E, Hochhauser 
E.

Author information:
(1)Gonda (Goldschmied) Medical Diagnostic Research Center, The Mina and Everard 
Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.
Toll-like receptors are expressed in immune cells and cardiac muscle.
We 
examined whether the cardiac Toll-like receptor 4 (TLR4) is involved in the 
acute myocardial dysfunction caused by septic shock and myocardial ischemia 
(MI).
We used wild type mice (WT), TLR4 deficient (TLR4-ko) mice and chimeras 
that underwent myeloablative bone marrow transplantation to dissociate between 
TLR4 expression in the heart (TLR4-ko/WT) and the immunohematopoietic system 
(WT/TLR4-ko).
Mice were injected with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) (septic shock 
model) or subjected to coronary artery ligation (MI model) and tested in vivo 
and ex vivo, for function, histopathology proinflammatory cytokine and TLR4 
expression.
WT mice challenged with LPS or MI displayed reduced cardiac 
function, increased myocardial levels of IL-1 beta and TNF-alpha and 
upregulation of mRNA encoding TLR4 prior to myocardial leukocyte infiltration.
TLR4 deficient mice sustained significantly smaller infarctions as compared to 
control mice at comparable areas at risk.
The cardiac function of TLR4-ko mice 
was not affected by LPS and demonstrated reduced suppression by MI compared to 
WT.
Chimeras deficient in myocardial TLR4 were resistant to suppression induced 
by LPS and the heart function was less depressed, compared to the TLR4-ko, 
following MI in the acute phase (4h).
In contrast, hearts of chimeras deficient 
in immunohematopoietic TLR4 expression were suppressed both by LPS and MI, 
exhibiting increased myocardial cytokine levels, similar to WT mice.
We 
concluded that cardiac function of TLR4-ko mice and chimeric mice expressing 
TLR4 in the immunohematopoietic system, but not in the heart, revealed 
resistance to LPS and reduced cardiac depression following MI, suggesting that 
TLR4 expressed by the cardiomyocytes themselves plays a key role in this acute 
phenomenon.
(c) 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.yjmcc.2010.02.020
PMID: 20211628 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depressed metabolism and low protein catabolism in fasting grey seal pups <jats:p>Grey seal pups (<jats:italic>Halichoerus grypus</jats:italic>) were collected at the time of weaning (mid‐October) and fasted for 52 days at thermoneutrality in separate cages. Body weight decreased exponentially
 while metabolic rate dropped 45% from an average of 2.95 ± 0.15 (SEM) W kg<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup> at day 2 of fasting to a stable level of 1.62 ± 0.06 (SEM) W kg<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup> from day 10 to day 47 of fasting.
Respiratory quotient was low, indicating extensive catabolism of triglycerides, while plasma cortisol was fairly stable at 110 ± 8 (SEM) nmol 1<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup> throughout the fasting period.
Daily urinary output decreased from 236 ± 20 (SEM) ml day<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup> at day 2 to a stable value of 87 ± 6 (SEM) ml day<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup> between days 8 and 50 of fasting.
The urine was analysed for urea, uric acid, creatinine, ammonia, total nitrogen and osmolality.
Urea was always the principal excretory end‐product, amounting to between 70 and 80% of the total excreted nitrogen.
The urine was moderately concentrated (range 770–1300 mosmol kg<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup>).
Total excreted urinary nitrogen decreased by 68% from 3.7±0.7 (SEM) g day<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup> to 1.2 ± 0.4(SEM) g day<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup> between days 2 and 50.
The urinary nitrogen was used to calculate the daily amount of protein being oxidized and its energy content was compared with the measured basal metabolic rate of individual animals.
Approximately 6% of the energy expended by grey seal pups during the post‐weaning fast is derived from oxidation of protein.
It is concluded that a rapid depression of basal metabolic rate and extensive blubber catabolism enable grey seal pups to endure prolonged periods of fasting without any apparent signs of discomfort or stress.</jats:p>
Effect of lithium augmentation on the trace elemental profile in diabetic rats. 1. Biometals. 1999 Dec;12(4):375-81. doi: 10.1023/a:1009254421223.

Effect of lithium augmentation on the trace elemental profile in diabetic rats.

Dhawan D(1)
 Singh A, Singh B, Bandhu HK, Chand B, Singh N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, Panjab University, Chandigarh, India.
Energy dispersive X-ray fluorescence technique was employed to study the 
interactions among various elements, viz.
: K, Zn, Br, Fe, Cu, Br & Rb in 4 
groups of rats viz.
control-GI, diabetic-GII (diabetes induced by i.p.
administration of alloxan monohydrate at a dose level of 150 mg/kg b.w; single 
injection), lithium treated-GIII (lithium administered as Li2 Co3 at a dose 
level of 1.1 g of Li2 Co3/kg animal diet; free access; serum lithium 
levels--0.5-1.2 mEq/L) and lithium + diabetic rats-GIV.
The different treatments 
continued for a total duration of 1 month.
The K contents were found to be 
significantly lowered in all the treatment groups which was maximum (28%) in 
lithium treated diabetic rats.
Depression in the levels of Rb was noticed in 
lithium treated and lithium treated diabetic (G-III and G-IV) groups.
However, 
the levels (Rb) remained unaltered in diabetic (G-II) group.
Interestingly, a 
significant decline was observed in Fe levels in G-III following lithium 
administration but the levels remained unchanged in G-IV with lithium 
administration to diabetic rats.
On the other hand, lithium treatment to normal 
(G-III) and diabetic (G-IV) rats indicated statistically significant elevation 
in the levels of Cu and Br.
However, diabetic (G-II) rats did not indicate any 
elevation in the levels of these two elements.
Interestingly, the concentrations 
of Zn were found to be significantly elevated in all the treatment groups, which 
was maximum (37%) in G-III (lithium) group.
A comparison of various elements 
from lithium treated diabetic group G-IV with the corresponding elements from 
the diabetic group G-II, implied a significant depression in K and Rb levels and 
a significant elevation in the levels of Br.
DOI: 10.1023/a:1009254421223
PMID: 10816739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Lasting Effects of Early Noradrenergic Receptor Occupation
on Brain Noradrenaline Turnover and on Beta-Receptors 1. Dev Pharmacol Ther. 1990;15(3-4):224-33. doi: 10.1159/000457650.

Lasting effects of early noradrenergic receptor occupation on brain 
noradrenaline turnover and on beta-receptors.

Boer GJ(1)
 Feenstra MG, Erdtsieck-Ernste BH, Gorter JA, Mirmiran M.

Author information:
(1)Netherlands Institute for Brain Research, Amsterdam.
Neuroactive substances reaching the developing brain can affect the formation of 
the functionality of nervous circuitry.
To explain this so-called functional 
neuroteratology it has been proposed that neurotransmission has persistently 
been altered.
Pharmacological interference with the developing central 
noradrenergic system in the rat by means of drugs like clonidine, yohimbine and 
propranolol, indeed revealed lasting changes in the turnover of noradrenaline in 
several brain areas, but no changes were found in beta-receptor density.
It is 
assumed that either alpha-receptor density is affected or that signal 
transduction is altered, since electrophysiologically a persistent 
supersensitivity was found for the noradrenaline-evoked depression of 
glutamate-evoked firing in e.g.
CA1 pyramidal cells of the hippocampus.
Elucidation of the underlying neurochemical mechanisms of such lasting effects 
of perinatal exposure to noradrenergic drugs aims at establishing the role of 
noradrenaline in development, but also to provide physicians with the 
possibility to better assess the advantages and disadvantages of drugs to be 
prescribed during reproduction and, hence, to make the best choice of treatment.
DOI: 10.1159/000457650
PMID: 1966021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Using Chronic Social Stress to Model Postpartum Depression in Lactating Rodents 1. J Vis Exp. 2013 Jun 10;(76):e50324. doi: 10.3791/50324.

Using chronic social stress to model postpartum depression in lactating rodents.

Carini LM(1)
 Murgatroyd CA, Nephew BC.
Author information:
(1)Biomedical Sciences, Tufts University Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine.
Exposure to chronic stress is a reliable predictor of depressive disorders, and 
social stress is a common ethologically relevant stressor in both animals and 
humans.
However, many animal models of depression were developed in males and 
are not applicable or effective in studies of postpartum females.
Recent studies 
have reported significant effects of chronic social stress during lactation, an 
ethologically relevant and effective stressor, on maternal behavior, growth, and 
behavioral neuroendocrinology.
This manuscript will describe this chronic social 
stress paradigm using repeated exposure of a lactating dam to a novel male 
intruder, and the assessment of the behavioral, physiological, and 
neuroendocrine effects of this model.
Chronic social stress (CSS) is a valuable 
model for studying the effects of stress on the behavior and physiology of the 
dam as well as her offspring and future generations.
The exposure of pups to CSS 
can also be used as an early life stress that has long term effects on behavior, 
physiology, and neuroendocrinology.
DOI: 10.3791/50324
PMCID: PMC3727206
PMID: 23792810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Health effects of inhaled tertiary amyl methyl ether and ethyl tertiary butyl ether 1. Toxicol Lett. 1995 Dec;82-83:719-24. doi: 10.1016/0378-4274(95)03590-7.

Health effects of inhaled tertiary amyl methyl ether and ethyl tertiary butyl 
ether.

White RD(1)
 Daughtrey WC, Wells MS.
Author information:
(1)Chevron Research and Technology Company, Richmond, CA 94804, USA.
Government specifications on the oxygen content of motor gasoline sold in 
certain areas of the USA have resulted in commercialization of the oxygenate 
fuel additives tertiary amyl methyl ether (TAME) and ethyl tertiary butyl ether 
(ETBE).
TAME and ETBE were evaluated in 4-week rat inhalation studies sponsored 
by Amoco Corporation.
Target vapor concentrations were 0, 500, 2000, or 4000 ppm 
for 6 h per day, 5 days per week, for 4 weeks.
TAME exposure at 4000 ppm 
resulted in 25% mortality, apparently as a consequence of severe CNS depression.
Body weight gain was decreased in the TAME high dose male rats.
In contrast, no 
ETBE exposed animals died during the study and no changes in body weight gain 
were observed.
Significant effects on functional observational battery (FOB) 
parameters were only found in the TAME high and mid-dose groups immediately 
after exposure.
All affected FOB parameters were normal by the next day.
Both 
TAME and ETBE exposures significantly increased relative liver weights in the 
high and mid-dose groups.
However, no treatment-related histopathologic findings 
were noted for either compound.
Clinical chemistry and hematology findings were 
absent with ETBE exposure and minimal with TAME exposure.
The results indicate 
that 500 ppm was a NOAEL for both compounds in these studies.
DOI: 10.1016/0378-4274(95)03590-7
PMID: 8597132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of prostaglandins E1
 E2, and F2alpha on gonadotrophin-induced ovulation in immature female rats.
1.
Adv Biosci.
1973;9:723-30.
Effect of prostaglandins E1, E2, and F2alpha on gonadotrophin-induced ovulation 
in immature female rats.
Batta SK, Piva F, Martini L.

PMID: 4805884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Expression patterns of c-Fos early gene and phosphorylated ERK in the rat brain following 1-h immobilization stress: concomitant changes induced in association with stress-related sleep rebound 1. Brain Struct Funct. 2015;220(3):1793-804. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0728-6. Epub
 2014 Feb 25.

Expression patterns of c-Fos early gene and phosphorylated ERK in the rat brain 
following 1-h immobilization stress: concomitant changes induced in association 
with stress-related sleep rebound.

Keshavarzy F(1)
 Bonnet C, Behzadi G, Cespuglio R.

Author information:
(1)Functional Neuroanatomy Laboratory, Physiology Department and Neuroscience 
Research Center, Faculty of Medicine, Shahid Beheshti Medical Sciences 
University, Evin, Tehran, Iran.
Erratum in
    Brain Struct Funct.
2015 May;220(3):1805. doi: 10.1007/s00429-014-0756-2.
Bezhadi, Gila [corrected to Behzadi, Gila].
An immobilization stress (IS) of 1 h applied at the beginning of the dark phase 
is followed by a sleep rebound.
During the restraint, serotonin released by the 
dorsal raphe nucleus within the arcuate area stimulates the availability of 
corticotropin-like intermediate lobe peptide (CLIP or ACTH18-39).
Three hours 
after the restraint, CLIP, through its hypnogenic properties, contributes to the 
sleep rebound that follows the IS.
Here, we immunohistochemically evaluated 
protein expression of the immediate early gene, c-Fos and phosphorylated 
extracellular signal-regulated kinase (p-ERK) in hypothalamic (preoptic area 
[POA], paraventricular nucleus [PVN], arcuate nucleus [ARC]) and brain stem 
(dorsal raphe [DR], locus coeruleus [LC]) nuclei involved in the acute response 
to stress and the subsequent stress-related sleep rebound (recovery period).
Immediately after the 1-h restraint, c-Fos and p-ERK expression increased in all 
structures studied, particularly in PVN and LC.
Three hours later, the number of 
p-ERK- and c-Fos-positive neurons was reduced in PVN and LC (p < 0.001) as well 
as in DR (p < 0.01) compared to control animals.
In contrast, both c-Fos and 
p-ERK expression in POA neurons (p < 0.01) and c-Fos expression in ARC neurons 
(p < 0.001) were increased 3 h after the IS.
The marked activation observed in 
PVN and LC nucleus immediately after the IS confirms that these structures are 
clearly reactive to stress.
However, the high activity observed in POA and ARC 
neurons during the recovery period, not described to date, highlights the 
particular part played by these structures in the stress-related sleep rebound.
An unbalance in the above processes may contribute to pathological outcomes, 
such as anxiety and depression.
DOI: 10.1007/s00429-014-0728-6
PMID: 24567082 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Homosynaptic depression and presynaptic inhibition of the N-I component of the dorsal surface potential in the spinal cord of rats with extracerebral neoplasms]. 1. Fiziol Zh. 1970 Nov-Dec;16(6):825-8.

[Homosynaptic depression and presynaptic inhibition of the N-I component of the 
dorsal surface potential in the spinal cord of rats with extracerebral 
neoplasms].

[Article in Ukrainian]

Bakhvala IuP.

PMID: 4328745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Viral depletion of VTA BDNF in rats modulates social behavior
 consequences of intermittent social defeat stress, and long-term weight regulation 1.
Neurosci Lett.
2011 Sep 20;502(3):192-6. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.07.043.
Epub  2011 Aug 4.
Viral depletion of VTA BDNF in rats modulates social behavior, consequences of 
intermittent social defeat stress, and long-term weight regulation.
Fanous S(1), Terwilliger EF, Hammer RP Jr, Nikulina EM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tufts University School of Medicine, Boston, MA, 
United States.
fanoussa@mail.nih.gov

Mesolimbic brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) is implicated in sustained 
behavioral changes following chronic social stress, and its depletion may reduce 
susceptibility to such behavioral alterations.
Enhanced mesolimbic BDNF is 
proposed as pro-depressive and anhedonic, while depleting ventral tegmetal area 
(VTA) BDNF increases weight by enhancing hedonic eating.
Here, we questioned 
whether depletion of VTA BDNF would alleviate social defeat stress-induced 
deficits in weight regulation, or affect social behavior in the presence or 
absence of social stress.
Male Sprague-Dawley rats received bilateral intra-VTA 
infusions of adeno-associated virus (AAV) vectors containing shRNA against BDNF 
or a control virus.
Three weeks later, rats underwent 4 episodes of social 
defeat stress involving exposure to an aggressive Long-Evans resident rat, or 
control handling every third day.
Depleted VTA BDNF conferred resistance to the 
deficient weight regulation normally observed during intermittent social defeat 
stress, and enhanced long-term weight gain regardless of stress history.
In 
addition, social approach and avoidance behavior towards a novel social target 
were measured 7 weeks after stress.
Social defeat stress chronically reduced 
social behavior, whereas depletion of VTA BDNF chronically increased social 
behavior.
Our results reveal that depletion of VTA BDNF alleviates some 
consequences of intermittent social defeat stress, enhances social behavior, and 
may contribute to weight gain.
These data implicate VTA BDNF in protracted 
behavioral responses to stress, social stimuli, and weight regulation.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2011.07.043
PMCID: PMC3179249
PMID: 21839142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The potential role of excessive cortisol induced by HPA hyperfunction in the pathogenesis of depression 1. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 1995;5 Suppl:77-82. doi:
10.1016/0924-977x(95)00039-r.

The potential role of excessive cortisol induced by HPA hyperfunction in the 
pathogenesis of depression.

Stokes PE(1).

Author information:
(1)Cornell Medical Center
 White Plains, NY 10605, USA.
Prolonged hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis overactivity occurs 
at all levels of this axis during stress in normals and some depressed patients.
This can induce enlargement of the pituitary and adrenals.
Various reports 
showed that cortisol can affect mood and behavior, and disrupt memory and 
recall.
The integrity of the hippocampus is essential for memory function and, 
via the high density of its cortisol receptors, cortisol induced inhibitory 
feedback to the HPA axis.
Animal data suggest that over time aging and stress 
can permanently downregulate hippocampal cell receptors, produce chronic 
hippocampal inflammation (astroglial), and kill cells.
Cushing's syndrome 
patients (high cortisol) show diminished hippocampal size and verbal recall 
inversely related to cortisol levels.
All the above is consistent with the 
'cascade hypothesis' of cortisol induced hippocampal damage with resultant 
diminished inhibition to HPA hyperactivity in a circular manner.
High cortisol 
is associated with altered neurotransmitter function, e.g., diminished brain 
serotonin synthesis, low CSF 5HIAA, and increased noradrenergic activity.
DOI: 10.1016/0924-977x(95)00039-r
PMID: 8775763 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Actions of Bovine Somatotropin on Polymorphonuclear Leukocytes and Lymphocytes in Cattle 1. J Dairy Sci. 1991 Jul;74(7):2145-52. doi: 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(91)78387-2.

Actions of bovine somatotropin on polymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes 
in cattle.

Elvinger F(1)
 Hansen PJ, Head HH, Natzke RP.
Author information:
(1)Dairy Science Department, University of Florida, Gainesville 32611.
Objectives were to determine 1) in vitro effects of bST on function of 
polymorphonuclear leukocytes and lymphocytes and 2) in vivo effects of bST on 
leukocyte function of heifers fed to maintain medium or high growth rates.
When 
administered in vitro, bST did not affect function of polymorphonuclear 
leukocytes.
[Methyl-3H]thymidine incorporation by resting lymphocytes was 
stimulated by 1000 ng/ml bST.
When given in vitro, bST did not further enhance 
[methyl-3H]thymidine uptake by mitogen-stimulated lymphocytes cultured at 38.5 
degrees C but reduced the depression of mitogen-stimulated proliferation caused 
by incubating cells at 42 degrees C. When bST was administered in vivo, 
phagocytosis and killing of Escherichia coli by polymorphonuclear leukocytes 
from bST-treated heifers were not different from cells of control heifers.
As 
measured by [methyl-3H]thymidine uptake after stimulation with 
phytohemagglutinin, lymphocytes from bST-treated heifers responded similarly to 
those of control heifers when incubated at 38.5 degrees C, but the depression in 
[methyl-3H]thymidine uptake due to culture at 42 degrees C was less for 
lymphocytes obtained from bST-treated heifers.
In conclusion, bST had little 
effect on function of polymorphonuclear leukocytes but could promote 
proliferation of lymphocytes in vitro and protect cells from effects of elevated 
temperature.
DOI: 10.3168/jds.S0022-0302(91)78387-2
PMID: 1894810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Persistent Hyperactivity Following a Single Intracerebroventricular Dose of Ouabain 1. Physiol Behav. 1998 Feb 1;63(3):403-6. doi: 10.1016/s0031-9384(97)00457-5.

Persistent hyperactivity following a single intracerebroventricular dose of 
ouabain.

Ruktanonchai DJ(1)
 El-Mallakh RS, Li R, Levy RS.
Author information:
(1)Mood Disorders Research Program, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Louisville School of Medicine, Kentucky 40292, USA.
Intracerebroventricular (i.c.v.)
administration of ouabain has been shown to 
alter motor activity in the rat.
It has been purported that this may model the 
behavioral abnormalities of human manic-depressive (bipolar) illness.
Since 
manic-depression is a recurrent condition, we elected to investigate the effects 
of the multiple administration of i.c.v.
ouabain.
Male Sprague-Dawley rats were 
allowed to acclimate to the animal facility for 7-10 days after which time 
i.c.v.
cannulae were placed.
Animals received two i.c.v.
injections of either 
ouabain (10[-3] M) or artificial cerebrospinal fluid (aCSF) 9 days apart, so 
that 6 rats received aCSF-aCSF, 6 received ouabain-aCSF, and 6 received 
ouabain-ouabain.
Behavioral activity was evaluated in an open field (86 x 86 cm 
subdivided into sixteen 21.5 x 21.5-cm squares) for 20 min at baseline and 
immediately following each i.c.v.
injection.
After the last behavioral test, the 
animals were killed, and the brains were rapidly harvested and dissected over 
ice.
Specific ouabain binding and sodium pump activity were determined.
A single 
dose of ouabain produced a marked increase (297.0%, p = 0.002) in open field 
activity compared to both baseline behavior and to aCSF injected animals.
The 
effects of ouabain appeared to last for 9 days.
A second i.c.v.
injection of 
either ouabain (136.5 +/- 60.4 SEM) or aCSF (108.0%, p < 0.01) had no effect on 
the activity level which was intermediate between the initial ouabain 
hyperactivity and the baseline level.
Nine days after ouabain administration, 
hippocampal ouabain binding was increased relative to the control group (5477 
+/- 485.7 vs. 3579 +/- 518.6, p < 0.05) and sodium pump activity was relatively 
lower (2293.8 +/- 265.5 vs. 3174.2 +/- 410.5, p < 0.05).
DOI: 10.1016/s0031-9384(97)00457-5
PMID: 9469734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Histochemische
 elektronenmikroskopische und quantitative Studien �ber den Glykogenvorrat der Plexus chorioidei vonRana temporaria L. 1.
Z Zellforsch Mikrosk Anat.
1968;88(4):511-36.
[Histochemical, electron microscopic and quantitative studies of glycogen 
storage in the choroid plexus of Rana temporaria L].
[Article in German]

Paul E.

PMID: 5722599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Impact of early-life stress
 on group III mGlu receptor levels in the rat hippocampus: Effects of ketamine, electroconvulsive shock therapy and fluoxetine treatment 1.
Neuropharmacology.
2013 Mar;66:236-41. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.05.006.
Epub 2012 May 17.
Impact of early-life stress, on group III mGlu receptor levels in the rat 
hippocampus: effects of ketamine, electroconvulsive shock therapy and fluoxetine 
treatment.
O' Connor RM(1), Pusceddu MM, Dinan TG, Cryan JF.
Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, University College Cork, Ireland.
The glutamatergic system is increasingly being viewed as a promising target for 
the development of novel treatments for depression.
The group III metabotropic 
glutamate (mGlu) receptors (mGlu(4, 7) and (8) receptors) in particular are 
beginning to show promise in this respect.
It remains unclear how antidepressant 
medications modulate mGlu receptors.
In this study we investigated the effects 
of three antidepressant treatments (fluoxetine, ketamine and electroconvulsive 
shock therapy (ECT)).
Ketamine is an NMDA receptor antagonist which possess a 
rapid antidepressant therapeutic profile and moreover is effective in cases of 
treatment-resistant depression.
Furthermore, ECT is also a therapeutic strategy 
possessing increased efficacy compared to conventional monoamine based 
therapies.
The effect these two highly efficacious treatments have on 
hippocampal group III mGlu receptors remains completely unexplored.
To redress 
this deficit we investigated the effects these treatments and the prototypical 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) fluoxetine would have on 
hippocampal group III mGlu receptor mRNA levels in naïve Sprague-Dawley rats and 
rats which had undergone early-life stress in the form of the maternal 
separation (MS) procedure.
We found MS significantly reduced mGlu(4) receptor 
expression and fluoxetine reversed this MS induced change.
ECT and ketamine 
treatment significantly reduced mGlu(4) receptor expression in non-separated 
(NS) animals while having no effect in MS animals.
Fluoxetine and ECT 
significantly increased mGlu(7) receptor expression in NS animals.
This work 
demonstrates changes to mGlu(4) receptor expression may be a lasting molecular 
change which occurs due to early-life stress.
Taken together our data shows 
there are selective changes to group III mGlu receptors under basal and 
early-life stress conditions.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 
'Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors'.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.05.006
PMID: 22609536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of 5-methoxy-N
N-dimethyltryptamine on behavior and raphe unit acitivity in freely moving cats 1.
Eur J Pharmacol.
1979 Feb 15;54(1-2):43-50. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(79)90406-0.
Effects of 5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine on behavior and raphe unit activity 
in freely moving cats.
Trulson ME, Jacobs BL.
5-methoxy-N,N-dimethyltryptamine (5-MeODMT) produced a dose-dependent decrease 
in the discharge rate of serotonin-containing neurons in the dorsal raphe 
nucleus of freely moving cats.
This ranged from a 15% decrease at 10 
microgran/kg, i.m., to a virtual complete depression of activity at 250 
microgram/kg.
5-MeODMT's effects on raphe units occurred with a very short 
latency (3-5 min) and its duration of action was dose-dependent and limited to 
an hour or less.
The degree of depression of raphe unit activity was directly 
related to the frequency of occurrence of a number of hallucinogen-specific cat 
behaviors such as limb flick and abortive groom.
There was also a close temporal 
correlation between the depression of raphe unit activity and the occurrence of 
these behaviors.
These data indicate that the effects of 5-MeODMT may be 
primarily dependent on its actions upon brain serotonin neurons.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(79)90406-0
PMID: 283930 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Corticostriatal synaptic function in mouse models of Huntington's disease: early effects of huntingtin repeat length and protein load <jats:p>Huntington's disease (HD) is an autosomal dominant
 late onset, neurodegenerative disease characterized by motor deficits and dementia that is caused by expansion of a CAG repeat in the HD gene.
Clinical manifestations result from selective neuronal degeneration of predominantly GABAergic striatal medium‐sized spiny neurons (MSNs).
A growing number of studies demonstrate that personality, mood and cognitive disturbances are some of the earliest signs of HD and may reflect synaptic dysfunction prior to neuronal loss.
Previous studies in striatal MSNs demonstrated early alterations in NMDA‐type glutamate receptor currents in several HD mouse models, as well as evidence for presynaptic dysfunction prior to disease manifestations in the R6/2 HD fragment mouse model.
We have compared corticostriatal synaptic function in full‐length, human HD gene‐carrying YAC transgenic mice expressing a non‐pathogenic CAG repeat (YAC18; control) with three increasingly severe variants of pathogenic HD gene‐expressing mice (YAC72 and two different lines of YAC128), at ages that precede any detectable disease phenotype.
We report presynaptic dysfunction and a propensity towards synaptic depression in YAC72 and YAC128 compared to YAC18 mice, and, in the most severe model, we also observed altered AMPA receptor function.
When normalized to evoked AMPAR currents, postsynaptic NMDAR currents are augmented in all three pathogenic HD YAC variants.
These findings demonstrate multiple perturbations to corticostriatal synaptic function in HD mice, furthering our understanding of the early effects of the HD mutation that may contribute to cognitive dysfunction, mood disorders and later development of more serious dysfunction.
Furthermore, this study provides a set of neurophysiological sequelae against which to test and compare other mouse models and potential therapies in HD.</jats:p>
Depression of long term potentiation in gerbil hippocampus following postischemic hypothermia 1. Brain Res. 2000 Aug 4;873(1):168-72. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(00)02521-x.

Depression of long term potentiation in gerbil hippocampus following 
postischemic hypothermia.

Miyamoto O(1)
 Nakamura T, Yamagami S, Negi T, Tokuda M, Matsui H, Itano T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Kagawa Medical University, Miki-cho, Japan.
To investigate the mechanism of chronic cell death following postischemic 
hypothermia, the change of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) were examined 
by immunohistochemistry of NMDAR1 and long-term potentiation (LTP) in the CA1 
subfield of the gerbil hippocampus.
At 1 week following postischemic hypothermia 
(32 degrees Cx4 h), all CA1 neurons survived; however, immunoreactivity of 
NMDAR1 increased in neuronal perikarya whereas decreased in dendrites in the CA1 
neurons.
The abnormality was still observed in remaining CA1 neurons at 1 month 
after hypothermia.
LTP was also significantly depressed at 1 week after 
hypothermia.
These results suggest that some abnormalities in the glutamate 
receptor may be caused by ischemia; such abnormality would persist in spite of 
hypothermia treatment, resulting in the depression of LTP.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(00)02521-x
PMID: 10915827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Relationship between dopamine deficit and the expression of depressive behavior resulted from alteration of serotonin system <jats:title>ABSTRACT</jats:title><jats:p>Depression frequently accompanies in Parkinson's disease (PD). Previous research suggested that dopamine (DA) and serotonin systems are closely linked with depression in PD. However
 comprehensive studies about the relationship between these two neurotransmitter systems are limited.
Therefore, the purpose of this study is to evaluate the effect of dopaminergic destruction on the serotonin system.
The interconnection between motor and depression was also examined.
Two PET scans were performed in the 6‐hydroxydopamine (6‐OHDA) lesioned and sham operated rats: [<jats:sup>18</jats:sup>F]FP‐CIT for DA transporters and [<jats:sup>18</jats:sup>F]Mefway for serotonin 1A (5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>) receptors.
Here, 6‐OHDA is a neurotoxin for dopaminergic neurons.
Behavioral tests were used to evaluate the severity of symptoms: rotational number for motor impairment and immobility time, acquired from the forced swim test for depression.
Region‐of‐interests were drawn in the striatum and cerebellum for the DA system and hippocampus and cerebellum for the 5‐HT system.
The cerebellum was chosen as a reference region.
Nondisplaceable binding potential in the striatum and hippocampus were compared between 6‐OHDA and sham groups.
As a result, the degree of DA depletion was negatively correlated with rotational behavior (<jats:italic>R</jats:italic><jats:sup>2</jats:sup> = 0.79, <jats:italic>P</jats:italic> = 0.003).
In 6‐OHDA lesioned rats, binding values for 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub> receptors was 22% lower than the sham operated group.
This decrement of 5‐HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub> receptor binding was also correlated with the severity of depression (<jats:italic>R</jats:italic><jats:sup>2</jats:sup> = 0.81, <jats:italic>P</jats:italic> = 0.006).
Taken together, this research demonstrated that the destruction of dopaminergic system causes the reduction of the serotonergic system resulting in the expression of depressive behavior.
The degree of dopaminergic dysfunction was positively correlated with the impairment of the serotonin system.
Severity of motor symptoms was also closely related to depressive behavior.
<jats:bold>Synapse 69:453–460, 2015.</jats:bold> © 2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.</jats:p>
Androgen dependence in hamsters: Overdose
 tolerance, and potential opioidergic mechanisms 1.
Neuroscience.
2005;130(4):971-81. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.09.063.
Androgen dependence in hamsters: overdose, tolerance, and potential opioidergic 
mechanisms.
Peters KD(1), Wood RI.
Author information:
(1)Department of Cell and Neurobiology, Keck School of Medicine at the 
University of Southern California, 1333 San Pablo Street, BMT 401, Los Angeles, 
CA 90033, USA.
Anabolic steroids are drugs of abuse.
However, the potential for steroid reward 
and addiction remains largely unexplored.
This study used i.c.v.
testosterone 
self-administration and controlled infusions of testosterone or vehicle in 
hamsters to explore central mechanisms of androgen overdose.
Forty-two hamsters 
used nose-pokes to self-administer 1 microg/microl testosterone i.c.v.
4 h/day 
in an operant chamber.
During 1-56 days of androgen self-administration, 10 
(24%) hamsters died.
Deaths correlated with peak daily intake of testosterone.
Of the hamsters that self-administered a peak intake of <20 microg/day, there 
was 100% survival (10/10).
Survival decreased to 86% (19/22) when daily 
testosterone intake peaked at 20-60 microg/day.
Only 30% (three of 10) survived 
when daily testosterone intake exceeded 60 microg/day.
Deaths are not due to 
volume or vehicle because i.c.v.
infusions of 80 mul vehicle had no effect.
Testosterone overdose resembles opiate intoxication.
When male hamsters received 
infusions of 40 microg testosterone, locomotion (25.1+/-18.8 grid-crossings/10 
min), respiration (72.7+/-5.4 breaths/min) and body temperature (33.5+/-0.4 
degrees C) were significantly reduced, compared with males receiving vehicle 
infusions (186.1+/-8.1 crossings/10 min, 117.6+/-1.0 breaths/min, 35.9+/-0.1 
degrees C, P<0.05).
However, males developed tolerance to continued daily 
testosterone infusion.
After 15 days, locomotion (170.2+/-6.3 crossings), 
respiration (118.4+/-1.3 breaths/min), and body temperature (35.3+/-0.3 degrees 
C) in testosterone-infused males were equivalent to that in vehicle controls 
(P>0.05).
The depressive effects of testosterone infusion are blocked by the 
opioid antagonist, naltrexone.
With naltrexone pre-treatment (10 mg/kg s.c.), 
locomotion (183.7+/-1.8 crossings/10 min), respiration (116.9+/-0.3 
breaths/min), and body temperature (36.1+/-0.4 degrees C) during testosterone 
infusion were equivalent to vehicle controls.
Likewise, naltrexone prevents the 
reinforcing effects of i.c.v.
testosterone self-administration.
These results 
indicate that testosterone at high doses causes central autonomic depression, 
which may be a factor in deaths during self-administration.
As well, the 
depressive effects of large quantities of testosterone may be mediated, at least 
in part, by an opioidergic mechanism.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.09.063
PMID: 15652994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
First description of malignant retrobulbar and intracranial teratoma in a lesser kestrel (<i>Falco naumanni</i>) 1. Avian Pathol. 2008 Aug;37(4):413-4. doi: 10.1080/03079450802216660.

First description of malignant retrobulbar and intracranial teratoma in a lesser 
kestrel (Falco naumanni).

López RM(1)
 Múrcia DB.
Author information:
(1)Centre de Fauna de Torreferrussa (DMAH), Santa Perpétua de Mogoda, Barcelona, 
Spain.
rafael.molina@gencat.net

Teratomas are defined as germ cell origin neoplasms that can be rarely found in 
either humans or animals.
Their most common localization is the gonads, although 
extragonadal localization has also been observed.
In avian medicine, there is 
scarce literature about the occurrence of teratomas and their clinical 
implications, and this is mainly in wildlife birds .
For this reason, we report 
the first description of a teratoma with both retrobulbar and intracranial 
locations in a 10-day-old chick of a lesser kestrel (Falco naumanni) born in 
captivity.
The raptor was treated in a centre of wildlife rehabilitation because 
of the presence of left periocular swelling and exopthalmos.
The bird worsened 
rapidly with signs of vestibular syndrome, ataxia and depression, and euthanasia 
was practised for humanitarian reasons.
Histological examination characterized 
both masses as malignant teratomas based on the presence of tissues of the three 
germ cell layers and the presence of both anaplastic foci and immature tissues.
DOI: 10.1080/03079450802216660
PMID: 18622858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Quetiapine Prevents Anhedonia Induced by Acute or Chronic Stress 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007 Aug;32(8):1783-90. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301291. 
Epub 2007 Jan 10.

Quetiapine prevents anhedonia induced by acute or chronic stress.

Orsetti M(1)
 Canonico PL, Dellarole A, Colella L, Di Brisco F, Ghi P.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Scienze Chimiche, Alimentari, Farmaceutiche e Farmacologiche, 
Università del Piemonte Orientale A. Avogadro, Novara, Italy.
orsetti@pharm.unipmn.it

The role of atypical antipsychotics as add-on treatments and as primary mood 
stabilizers in different phases of bipolar disorder is an important current 
research area.
Although in bipolar patients the main therapeutic indication of 
quetiapine (QTP) is the management of acute mania, several observations suggest 
that this agent may exert antidepressant as well as antimanic effects.
However, 
in our knowledge, there are no preclinical studies supporting this hypothesis.
Thus, the main goal of the present work was to evaluate the putative 
antidepressant effect of QTP (0.4, 2.0, or 10 mg/kg/day), in comparison to 
amitriptyline (AMI) (2 or 5 mg/kg/day), in rats exposed to acute or chronic 
stress.
The administration of QTP, 2 mg/kg/day, prevents the onset of anhedonia 
in rats exposed to a 6-week chronic mild stress (CMS) protocol.
The effect of 
QTP has a slow onset, beginning at week 5, and causes a complete recovery from 
anhedonia.
In this respect, the effect of QTP is similar to that obtained after 
chronic administration of AMI 2 or 5 mg/kg/day.
Our findings also indicate that 
a 6-week administration of QTP, 2 or 10 mg/kg/day, has protective effects 
against the onset of anhedonia caused by the exposure to an acute subthreshold 
stressful event in rats that have previously experienced the CMS procedure.
The 
results suggest that QTP is able to prevent both the transient mood depression 
caused by acute stress and the long-lasting anhedonic state induced by exposure, 
over a period of weeks, to a variety of unpredictable mild stressors.
DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301291
PMID: 17213846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of steroids on the adenohypophyseal gonadotrophes & its relation to spermatogenesis in Rana hexadactyla lesson. 1. Indian J Exp Biol. 1977 Sep;15(9):703-7.

Effect of steroids on the adenohypophyseal gonadotrophes & its relation to 
spermatogenesis in Rana hexadactyla lesson.

Kasinathan S
 Basu SL, Sriramulu V.

PIP: The exogenous administration of selected steroids to male Rana hexadactyla 
Lesson was used to investigate the hypophyseal-testicular axis and to determine 
their influence on the activity of the hypophyseal cell types and the impact of 
this activity on spermatogenic activity.
The frogs were treated as follows: 1) 
stilbestrol (S), 1.25 in 1 ml Ringer as a single dose or in 1.25 ml Ringer in 
.25 ml doses every 48 hours for 15 days 2) testosterone (T), 1 mg/ml every day 
for 15 days; 3) estradiol (E), 5 mg in 15 ml Ringer administered in 1 ml amounts 
for 15 days; 4) deoxycorticosterone (DOCA), 7.5 mg in 15 ml Ringers in 1 ml 
amounts for the test period; and 5) cortisol (F) .5 mg in 1 ml Ringer given as a 
single dose for 15 days.
Single dose administration of S resulted in distortion 
of the histoarchitecture of the par distalis.
The split dose of S was 
ineffective in the par distalis.
T reduced the size of B2 cells.
In E-treated 
animals regression of all cell types of the par distalis was observed and 
increased production of secretory material was indicated.
DOCA-treated frogs 
displayed atypical cellular morphology and cytoplasmic granulations with 
extensive fibrosis in the par distalis.
A regression of all types of 
adenohypophyseal cells and cytoplasmic degranulations were observed in F-treated 
frogs.
While all steroids cause some changes in cytomorphological features, 
tinctorial affinities, and secretory activity, the magnitude of change is 
dependent on the steroid administered.
Spermatogenesis was inactivated 
throughout.
PMID: 611087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of bombesin on the structure and function of the rat adrenal cortex 1. Res Exp Med (Berl). 1991;191(2):121-8. doi: 10.1007/BF02576667.

Effect of bombesin on the structure and function of the rat adrenal cortex.

Malendowicz LK(1)
 Leśniewska B, Baranowska B, Nowak M, Majchrzak M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Histology and Embryology, Poznan Academy of Medicine, Poland.
Intact and dexamethasone-treated adult female Wistar rats were infused (Alzet 
osmotic minipumps) with bombesin (0.75 micrograms/rat per day) for 7 days.
Bombesin depressed body weight and capacity of adrenal homogenate to secrete 
corticosterone; the latter effect was reflected in intact rats by a drop in 
serum corticosterone level.
Bombesin had no effect on pituitary and serum 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) concentration and serum aldosterone level.
In 
intact animals, infusion of bombesin resulted in lowering of the number of 
parenchymal cells in adrenal cortex connected with the hypertrophy of 
glomerulosa and fasciculata cells.
Moreover, bombesin lowered basal 
corticosterone secretion by isolated rat adrenocortical cells; however, 
neuropeptide applied did not change the response of isolated cells to ACTH 
stimulation.
The data obtained clearly demonstrate inhibitory effect of bombesin 
on basal corticosterone secretion by the rat adrenal cortex.
DOI: 10.1007/BF02576667
PMID: 1650017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of histamine release from rat mast cells by cytochalasin A and other sulfhydryl reagents 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1979 Jun 1;28(11):1765-9. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(79)90538-0.

Inhibition of histamine release from rat mast cells by cytochalasin A and other 
sulfhydryl reagents.

Lagunoff D
 Wan H.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(79)90538-0
PMID: 89848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Change in bi‐directional plasticity at CA1 synapses in hippocampal slices taken from 6‐hydroxydopamine‐treated rats: the role of endogenous norepinephrine <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The object of the present study is to investigate the role of endogenous adrenergic innervation in regulating bi‐directional synaptic plasticity in rat hippocampal CA1 synapses. The endogenous adrenergic system was eliminated by giving subcutaneous injection of 6‐hydroxydopamine (6‐OHDA) to rats immediately after birth
 and the animals were killed for experiments at postnatal ages of 25–35 days.
In hippocampal slices taken from 6‐OHDA‐treated animals, theta‐burst stimulation at 100 Hz failed to induce long‐term potentiation (LTP) at CA1 synapses.
However, the induction of long‐term depression (LTD) by prolonged low frequency stimulation at 1 Hz was unaffected in slices from 6‐OHDA‐treated animals.
Bath application of norepinephrine (NE) restored LTP to control levels and blocked LTD.
This effect was mimicked by β‐ but not α‐adrenergic receptor agonists, i.e.
by isoproterenol but not phenylephrine.
The activators of adenylyl cyclase and protein kinase A (PKA), i.e.
forskolin and 8‐bromoadenosine‐3′, 5′‐cyclic monophosphate, respectively, restored LTP in slices from 6‐OHDA‐treated animals.
In addition, application of the D1/D5 receptor agonist, dihydrexidine, also restored LTP in slices from 6‐OHDA‐treated animals.
These results suggest that physiologically the recruitment of catecholamine innervation may be important for induction of LTP at hippocampal CA1 synapses during tetanic stimulation, while it may not be essential for LTD induction by prolonged 1 Hz stimulation.
The released NE and dopamine exert their role in modulating synaptic plasticity via activation of β‐adrenergic and D1/D5 receptors, respectively, which in turn increase the levels of cytoplasm adenosine‐3′,5′‐cyclic monophosphate and PKA.</jats:p>
Antagonistic effects of psycholeptic drugs on stress-induced analgesia. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1980 Oct;247(2):264-74.

Antagonistic effects of psycholeptic drugs on stress-induced analgesia.

Doi T
 Sawa N.

Stress-induced analgesia was significantly antagonized by naloxone and was 
dose-dependently reduced by diazepam, chlordiazepoxide, flurazepam, medazepam, 
nitrazepam, estazolam, phenobarbital, chlorpromazine, levomepromazine, 
haloperidol and propranolol.
In contrast to psycholeptics, morphine 
substantially increased in threshold of nociceptive response in the post-stress 
session.
Centrally acting muscle relaxants, tolperisone and carosiprodol had no 
substantial anti-stress effects.
These results suggest that the stress-induced 
analgesia is probably mediated through endogenous opioids in the central nervous 
system.
The approach used in our study provides a simple method for assessing 
the anti-stress action of psycholeptics.
PMID: 6108747 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Alzheimer disease-related presenilin-1 variants exert distinct effects on monoamine oxidase-A activity in vitro 1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2011 Jul;118(7):987-95. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-011-0616-7. Epub 2011 Mar 4.

Alzheimer disease-related presenilin-1 variants exert distinct effects on 
monoamine oxidase-A activity in vitro.

Pennington PR(1)
 Wei Z, Rui L, Doig JA, Graham B, Kuski K, Gabriel GG, Mousseau 
DD.
Author information:
(1)Cell Signalling Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry, University of 
Saskatchewan, B45 HSB, 107 Wiggins Rd, Saskatoon, SK, S7N 5E5, Canada.
Monoamine oxidase-A (MAO-A) has been associated with both depression and 
Alzheimer disease (AD).
Recently, carriers of AD-related presenilin-1 (PS-1) 
alleles have been found to be at higher risk for developing clinical depression.
We chose to examine whether PS-1 could influence MAO-A function in vitro.
Overexpression of selected AD-related PS-1 variants (wildtype, Y115H, ΔEx9 and 
M146V) in mouse hippocampal HT-22 cells affects MAO-A catalytic activity in a 
variant-specific manner.
The ability of the PS-1 substrate-competitor DAPT to 
induce MAO-A activity in cells expressing either PS-1 wildtype or PS-1(M146V) 
suggests the potential for a direct influence of PS-1 on MAO-A function.
In 
support of this, we were able to co-immunoprecipitate MAO-A with FLAG-tagged 
PS-1 wildtype and M146V proteins.
This potential for a direct protein-protein 
interaction between PS-1 and MAO-A is not specific for HT-22 cells as we were 
also able to co-immunoprecipitate MAO-A with FLAG-PS-1 variants in N2a mouse 
neuroblastoma cells and in HEK293 human embryonic kidney cells.
Finally, we 
demonstrate that the two PS-1 variants reported to be associated with an 
increased incidence of clinical depression [e.g., A431E and L235V] both induce 
MAO-A activity in HT-22 cells.
A direct influence of PS-1 variants on MAO-A 
function could provide an explanation for the changes in monoaminergic tone 
observed in several neurodegenerative processes including AD.
The ability to 
induce MAO-A catalytic activity with a PS-1/γ-secretase inhibitor should also be 
considered when designing secretase inhibitor-based therapeutics.
DOI: 10.1007/s00702-011-0616-7
PMID: 21373759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Histamine-liberation effect of hypotensive compounds present in various human serum albumins. Relation with blood group substances]. 1. Therapie. 1974 May-Jun;29(3):459-73.

[Histamine-liberation effect of hypotensive compounds present in various human 
serum albumins. Relation with blood group substances].

[Article in French]

Babapour V
 Boivin R, Bost J, Coquet B, Liautaud J, Pla J, Plan R.

PMID: 4140581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pollination ecology and inbreeding depression control individual flowering phenologies and mixed mating 1. Evolution. 2014 Nov;68(11):3051-65. doi: 10.1111/evo.12507. Epub 2014 Sep 29.

Pollination ecology and inbreeding depression control individual flowering 
phenologies and mixed mating.

Devaux C(1)
 Lande R, Porcher E.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Sciences de l'Evolution de Montpellier, UMR 5554, 34095, 
Montpellier, France.
celine.devaux@univ-montp2.fr.
We analyze evolution of individual flowering phenologies by combining an 
ecological model of pollinator behavior with a genetic model of inbreeding 
depression for plant viability.
The flowering phenology of a plant genotype 
determines its expected daily floral display which, together with pollinator 
behavior, governs the population rate of geitonogamous selfing (fertilization 
among flowers on the same plant).
Pollinators select plant phenologies in two 
ways: they are more likely to visit plants displaying more flowers per day, and 
they influence geitonogamous selfing and consequent inbreeding depression via 
their abundance, foraging behavior, and pollen carry-over among flowers on a 
plant.
Our model predicts two types of equilibria at stable intermediate selfing 
rates for a wide range of pollinator behaviors and pollen transfer parameters.
Edge equilibria occur at maximal or minimal selfing rates and are constrained by 
pollinators.
Internal equilibria occur between edge equilibria and are 
determined by a trade-off between pollinator attraction to large floral displays 
and avoidance of inbreeding depression due to selfing.
We conclude that 
unavoidable geitonogamous selfing generated by pollinator behavior can 
contribute to the common occurrence of stable mixed mating in plants.
© 2014 The Author(s).
Evolution © 2014 The Society for the Study of Evolution.
DOI: 10.1111/evo.12507
PMID: 25130655 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Estrous cycle affects the neurochemical and neurobehavioral profile of carvacrol-treated female rats 1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 2011 Sep 1;255(2):169-75. doi: 
10.1016/j.taap.2011.06.011. Epub 2011 Jun 23.

Estrous cycle affects the neurochemical and neurobehavioral profile of 
carvacrol-treated female rats.

Trabace L(1)
 Zotti M, Morgese MG, Tucci P, Colaianna M, Schiavone S, Avato P, 
Cuomo V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical Sciences, University of Foggia, V. le Luigi Pinto 1, 
71121 Foggia, Italy.
trabace@unifg.it

Carvacrol is the major constituent of essential oils from aromatic plants.
It 
showed antimicrobial, anticancer and antioxidant properties.
Although it was 
approved for food use and included in the chemical flavorings list, no 
indication on its safety has been estimated.
Since the use of plant extracts is 
relatively high among women, aim of this study was to evaluate carvacrol effects 
on female physiology and endocrine profiles by using female rats in proestrus 
and diestrus phases.
Serotonin and metabolite tissue content in prefrontal 
cortex and nucleus accumbens, after carvacrol administration (0.15 and 0.45g/kg 
p.o.
), was measured.
Drug effects in behavioral tests for alterations in motor 
activity, depression, anxiety-related behaviors and endocrine alterations were 
also investigated.
While in proestrus carvacrol reduced serotonin and metabolite 
levels in both brain areas, no effects were observed in diestrus phase.
Only in 
proestrus phase, carvacrol induced a depressive-like behavior in forced swimming 
test, without accompanying changes in ambulation.
The improvement of performance 
in FST after subchronic treatment with fluoxetine (20mg/kg) suggested a specific 
involvement of serotonergic system.
No differences were found across the groups 
with regard to self-grooming behavior.
Moreover, in proestrus phase, carvacrol 
reduced only estradiol levels without binding hypothalamic estradiol receptors.
Our study showed an estrous-stage specific effect of carvacrol on depressive 
behaviors and endocrine parameters, involving serotonergic system.
Given the 
wide carvacrol use not only as feed additive, but also as cosmetic essence and 
herbal remedy, our results suggest that an accurate investigation on the effects 
of its chronic exposure is warranted.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.taap.2011.06.011
PMID: 21723308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Growth of Fusarium moniliforme on carob aqueous extract and nutritional evaluation of its biomass <jats:p>Fusarium moniliforme was cultured semicontinuously on a carob medium in a 14-liter fermentor (8.5-liter working volume). The growth medium provided 2.4% carob sugar
 0.72% NH4H2PO4, and 0.03% MgSO4-7H2O.
The biomass harvest was 8.8 g/liter per day.
Ninety percent of the sugars were consumed, and the pH dropped from 5.9 to about 3.7.
The crude protein (N X 6.25) of the spray-dried mycelium was 380 g/kg, 300 g/kg for the true protein (Lowry), and 4.8 g/kg for the (Folin-Denis) tannic acid.
The mycelium was evaluated nutritionally with the weanling rat as experimental animal.
The protein efficiency ratio and net protein utilization values for the unsupplemented mycelium were 1.15 and 0.42, respectively, and for the mycelium supplemented with DL-methionine (5 g/kg) they were 2.31 and 0.72, respectively.
No growth depression was observed in the experimental rats, and on dissection of the carcasses the internal organs were found to be normal.</jats:p>
Effects of epinephrine
 norepinephrine, magnesium sulfate, and milrinone on survival and the occurrence of arrhythmias in amitriptyline poisoning in the rat 1.
Crit Care Med.
1994 Nov;22(11):1851-5.
Effects of epinephrine, norepinephrine, magnesium sulfate, and milrinone on 
survival and the occurrence of arrhythmias in amitriptyline poisoning in the 
rat.
Knudsen K(1), Abrahamsson J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia and Intensive Care, University of Göteborg, Sweden.
OBJECTIVES: Cardiac depression is the main adverse effect of severe tricyclic 
antidepressant poisoning.
The aim of this study was to compare the effects of 
several inotropic drugs on survival and the occurrence of arrhythmias in the 
treatment of amitriptyline poisoning.
DESIGN: Nonrandomized, controlled intervention trial.
SETTING: University laboratory.
SUBJECTS: Eighty-six male Wistar rats anesthetized with pentobarbital and 
mechanically ventilated.
INTERVENTIONS: Rats subjected to a 60-min continuous infusion of amitriptyline 
(1.25 mg/kg/min) were treated with a continuous infusion of either epinephrine, 
norepinephrine, milrinone, magnesium, epinephrine + magnesium, or norepinephrine 
+ magnesium.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Without treatment, all animals exhibited 
arrhythmias on the electrocardiogram within 20 mins.
All treatment drugs delayed 
the onset of arrhythmias, but significant differences were only observed after 
administration of epinephrine, epinephrine + magnesium sulfate, and 
norepinephrine + magnesium sulfate.
All the inotropic drugs markedly increased 
survival.
Sodium concentrations were unaffected by all treatments.
In control 
animals, potassium concentrations increased during amitriptyline infusion.
Norepinephrine treatment had no effect on potassium concentrations, whereas all 
other treatments resulted in decreased potassium concentrations.
CONCLUSIONS: All inotropic drugs used in the study increased survival in 
tricyclic antidepressant poisoning in rats without increasing the risk of 
arrhythmias.
Furthermore, epinephrine and norepinephrine + magnesium sulfate 
were effective in preventing arrhythmias, possibly due to improved hemodynamic 
performance or potassium homeostasis.
PMID: 7956291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cyclic-AMP response element binding protein (CREB) in the neutrophils of depressed patients 1. Psychiatry Res. 2011 Jan 30;185(1-2):108-12. doi: 
10.1016/j.psychres.2010.04.013. Epub 2010 May 23.

Cyclic-AMP response element binding protein (CREB) in the neutrophils of 
depressed patients.

Ren X(1)
 Dwivedi Y, Mondal AC, Pandey GN.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Illinois at Chicago, College of 
Medicine, Chicago, IL 60612, USA.
Cyclic-AMP response element binding (CREB) protein regulates the expression of 
many genes involved in the pathophysiology of depression.
Increased CREB levels 
were found in the brain of antidepressant-treated rats and decreased protein and 
mRNA expression of CREB was reported in the postmortem brain of depressed 
suicide victims.
We determined CREB protein expression, using Western blot 
technique, and CRE-DNA binding, using gel shift assay, in neutrophils obtained 
from 22 drug-free patients with major depressive disorder (MDD) and 23 normal 
control subjects.
Diagnosis of patients was based on Diagnostic and Statistical 
Manual of Mental Disorders DSM-IV criteria; severity of illness was rated by 
Hamilton Depression Rating Scale (HDRS).
We found that the CRE-DNA binding 
activity and CREB protein expression were significantly decreased in the 
neutrophils of drug-free MDD patients compared with normal control subjects.
Our 
findings suggest that CREB may play an important role in the pathophysiology of 
depression and that it may be an important target for the therapeutic action of 
antidepressant drugs.
Neutrophil CREB levels may also serve as a useful 
biomarker for patients with MDD.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.psychres.2010.04.013
PMCID: PMC3000439
PMID: 20494459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inflammatory macrophage nuclear factor-kappaB and proteasome activity are inhibited following exposure to inhaled isobutyl nitrite. 1. J Leukoc Biol. 2001 Apr;69(4):639-44.

Inflammatory macrophage nuclear factor-kappaB and proteasome activity are 
inhibited following exposure to inhaled isobutyl nitrite.

Ponnappan U(1)
 Soderberg LS.
Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Arkansas for Medical 
Sciences, Little Rock 72205, USA.
A history of abuse of nitrite inhalants has been correlated with HIV 
seropositivity and Kaposi's sarcoma.
A series of 14 daily, 45-min exposures of 
mice to 900-ppm isobutyl nitrite in an inhalation chamber reduced the number of 
peritoneal exudate macrophages (PEM) by 35% and the number of resident 
peritoneal macrophages (RPM) by 18%.
Although the tumoricidal activity of RPM 
was not affected by the inhalant, the cytotoxicity of PEM was reduced by 26%.
The induction of nitric oxide (NO) and the inducible NO synthase (iNOS) protein 
in PEM were inhibited by the inhalant to a similar extent.
Inhibition of 
NF-kappaB activation in PEM from mice exposed to the inhalant corresponded to 
reduced degradation of the NF-kappaB inhibitor, IkappaB alpha.
Proteasome-associated, enzymatic activity was compromised in PEM from 
inhalant-exposed mice, suggesting that inhaled isobutyl nitrite compromised 
macrophage, tumoricidal activity by inhibiting proteasomal degradation of the 
NF-kappaB inhibitor, IkappaB alpha.
PMID: 11310851 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Induction of Simian Virus 40 Antigen in BSC
            <sub>1</sub>
            Transformed Cells <jats:p>
            Heating to 45 C induced in virus-free clones of simian virus 40 (SV40) transformed BSC
            <jats:sub>1</jats:sub>
            cells the synthesis of SV40 viral antigen
 as evidenced by immunofluorescence.
Up to 3.8% of the cells exhibited viral antigen 72 hr after heating to 45 C for 30 min.
Depletion of arginine from the medium of the heated cells enhanced and increased the percentage of cells synthesizing viral antigen to 11%.
Cytosine arabinoside completely inhibited the induction of the viral antigen.
No infectious virus was recovered from the cells in which synthesis of viral antigen was induced.
However, small amounts of infectious SV40 virus were rescued from the BSC
            <jats:sub>1</jats:sub>
            transformed cells by fusion with rabbit kidney cells or by treatment with mitomycin C.
          </jats:p>
[Effect of serotonin antagonists and monoamine oxidase inhibitors on the antineoplastic effect of serotonin]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1968 Nov-Dec;31(6):735-8.

[Effect of serotonin antagonists and monoamine oxidase inhibitors on the 
antineoplastic effect of serotonin].

[Article in Russian]

Mal'tseva LF.

PMID: 5713590 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ovulation rate and serum LH levels in rats treated with indomethacin or prostaglandin E2 1. Prostaglandins. 1973 Apr;3(4):461-7. doi: 10.1016/0090-6980(73)90154-8.

Ovulation rate and serum LH levels in rats treated with indomethacin or 
prostaglandin E2.

Tsafriri A
 Koch Y, Lindner HR.
DOI: 10.1016/0090-6980(73)90154-8
PMID: 4738126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Liraglutide safety and efficacy in patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis (LEAN): a multicentre
 double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 study 1.
Lancet.
2016 Feb 13;387(10019):679-690. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00803-X.
Epub  2015 Nov 20.
Liraglutide safety and efficacy in patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis 
(LEAN): a multicentre, double-blind, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 2 
study.
Armstrong MJ(1), Gaunt P(2), Aithal GP(3), Barton D(4), Hull D(4), Parker R(1), 
Hazlehurst JM(5), Guo K(4); LEAN trial team; Abouda G(6), Aldersley MA(7), 
Stocken D(8), Gough SC(5), Tomlinson JW(5), Brown RM(9), Hübscher SG(10), 
Newsome PN(11).
Author information:
(1)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Birmingham Liver Biomedical 
Research Unit and Centre for Liver Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK; Liver and Hepatobiliary Unit, Queen Elizabeth Hospital 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(2)NIHR Birmingham Liver Biomedical Research Unit Clinical Trial group (EDD), 
CRUK Clinical Trials Unit, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
(3)NIHR Nottingham Digestive Diseases Biomedical Research Unit, Nottingham 
University Hospital NHS Trust and University of Nottingham, Nottingham, UK.
(4)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Birmingham Liver Biomedical 
Research Unit and Centre for Liver Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK; NIHR Birmingham Liver Biomedical Research Unit Clinical Trial 
group (EDD), CRUK Clinical Trials Unit, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
UK.
(5)Oxford Centre for Diabetes, Endocrinology and Metabolism, and NIHR Oxford 
Biomedical Research Centre, University of Oxford, Churchill Hospital, Oxford, 
UK.
(6)Department of Hepatology and Gastroenterology, Hull Royal Infirmary, Hull, 
UK.
(7)Liver Unit, St James's University Hospital, Leeds, UK.
(8)Newcastle University, Newcastle Clinical Trial Unit, Institute of Health and 
Society, Newcastle, UK.
(9)Department of Cellular Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK.
(10)Department of Cellular Pathology, Queen Elizabeth Hospital Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK; School of Cancer Sciences, University of Birmingham, Birmingham, 
UK.
(11)National Institute for Health Research (NIHR) Birmingham Liver Biomedical 
Research Unit and Centre for Liver Research, University of Birmingham, 
Birmingham, UK; Liver and Hepatobiliary Unit, Queen Elizabeth Hospital 
Birmingham, Birmingham, UK.
Electronic address: p.n.newsome@bham.ac.uk.
Comment in
    Lancet.
2016 Feb 13;387(10019):628-630. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00982-4.
Lancet.
2016 Jun 11;387(10036):2378-9. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30734-6.
Lancet.
2016 Jun 11;387(10036):2378. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30733-4.
Lancet.
2016 Jun 11;387(10036):2379. doi: 10.1016/S0140-6736(16)30672-9.
Hepatobiliary Surg Nutr.
2016 Dec;5(6):515-518. doi: 
10.21037/hbsn.2016.11.09.
BACKGROUND: Glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) analogues reduce hepatic steatosis, 
concentrations of liver enzymes, and insulin resistance in murine models of 
fatty liver disease.
These analogues are licensed for type 2 diabetes, but their 
efficacy in patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis is unknown.
We assessed 
the safety and efficacy of the long-acting GLP-1 analogue, liraglutide, in 
patients with non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.
METHODS: This multicentre, double-blinded, randomised, placebo-controlled phase 
2 trial was conducted in four UK medical centres to assess subcutaneous 
injections of liraglutide (1·8 mg daily) compared with placebo for patients who 
are overweight and show clinical evidence of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis.
Patients were randomly assigned (1:1) using a computer-generated, centrally 
administered procedure, stratified by trial centre and diabetes status.
The 
trial was designed using A'Hern's single-group method, which required eight 
(38%) of 21 successes in the liraglutide group for the effect of liraglutide to 
be considered clinically significant.
Patients, investigators, clinical trial 
site staff, and pathologists were masked to treatment assignment throughout the 
study.
The primary outcome measure was resolution of definite non-alcoholic 
steatohepatitis with no worsening in fibrosis from baseline to end of treatment 
(48 weeks), as assessed centrally by two independent pathologists.
Analysis was 
done by intention-to-treat analysis, which included all patients who underwent 
end-of-treatment biopsy.
The trial was registered with ClinicalTrials.gov, 
number NCT01237119.
FINDINGS: Between Aug 1, 2010, and May 31, 2013, 26 patients were randomly 
assigned to receive liraglutide and 26 to placebo.
Nine (39%) of 23 patients who 
received liraglutide and underwent end-of-treatment liver biopsy had resolution 
of definite non-alcoholic steatohepatitis compared with two (9%) of 22 such 
patients in the placebo group (relative risk 4·3 [95% CI 1·0-17·7]; p=0·019).
Two (9%) of 23 patients in the liraglutide group versus eight (36%) of 22 
patients in the placebo group had progression of fibrosis (0·2 [0·1-1·0]; 
p=0·04).
Most adverse events were grade 1 (mild) to grade 2 (moderate) in 
severity, transient, and similar in the two treatment groups for all organ 
classes and symptoms, with the exception of gastrointestinal disorders in 21 
(81%) of 23 patients in the liraglutide group and 17 (65%) of 22 patients in the 
placebo group, which included diarrhoea (ten [38%] patients in the liraglutide 
group vs five [19%] in the placebo group), constipation (seven [27%] vs none), 
and loss of appetite (eight [31%] vs two [8%]).
INTERPRETATION: Liraglutide was safe, well tolerated, and led to histological 
resolution of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis, warranting extensive, longer-term 
studies.
FUNDING: Wellcome Trust, National Institute of Health Research, and Novo 
Nordisk.
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/S0140-6736(15)00803-X
PMID: 26608256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dietary Vitamin C and Folic Acid Supplementation Ameliorates the Detrimental Effects of Heat Stress in Japanese Quail 1. J Nutr. 2003 Jun;133(6):1882-6. doi: 10.1093/jn/133.6.1882.

Dietary vitamin C and folic acid supplementation ameliorates the detrimental 
effects of heat stress in Japanese quail.

Sahin K(1)
 Onderci M, Sahin N, Gursu MF, Kucuk O.
Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Nutrition, Faculty of Veterinary Science, Firat 
University, Elazig, Turkey.
nsahinkm@yahoo.com

We evaluated the effects of vitamin C (L-ascorbic acid) and folic acid 
supplementation on performance, carcass characteristics and concentrations of 
the oxidative stress markers [malondialdehyde (MDA), homocysteine], 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH), vitamins C, E, A, B-12 and folic acid, and 
mineral status in broiler Japanese quail (Coturnix coturnix japonica) exposed to 
high ambient temperature (34 degrees C, 8 h/d, 0900-1700 h).
The birds (n = 150; 
10-d-old) kept at 34 degrees C were fed a basal diet (HS group) or the basal 
diet supplemented with 250 mg of L-ascorbic acid/kg of diet (Vit C group), 1 mg 
of folic acid/kg of diet (FA group) or both (Vit C + FA group), whereas birds 
kept at 22 degrees C were fed the basal diet (TN group).
Supplementing 
heat-stressed quail with vitamin C and folic acid improved performance compared 
to the HS group.
Effects generally were greatest in quail supplemented with 
both.
Although supplementation did not consistently restore concentrations to 
those of the TN group, it increased serum concentrations of the vitamins under 
study.
Furthermore, serum and tissue MDA, homocysteine and ACTH concentrations 
were lower in the supplemented groups than in the heat-stressed controls.
Retention of N, ash, Ca, P, Zn, Fe, Cu and Cr were highest in the Vit C + FA 
group and lowest in the HS group (P < 0.05).
The results of the study indicate 
that vitamin C and folic acid supplementation attenuates the decline in 
performance and antioxidant status caused by heat stress.
Such supplementation 
may offer protection against heat stress-related depression in performance of 
Japanese quail.
DOI: 10.1093/jn/133.6.1882
PMID: 12771333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Study on gastric secretory function by a combined stimulatory and inhibitory method]. 1. Zasshi Tokyo Ika Daigaku. 1970 Sep;28(5):727-47.

[Study on gastric secretory function by a combined stimulatory and inhibitory 
method].

[Article in Japanese]

Chang F.

PMID: 5535744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Spinal cord injury-specific depression of monosynaptic spinal reflex transmission by l-5-hydroxytryptophan results from loss of the 5-HT uptake system and not 5-HT receptor supersensitivity 1. Exp Neurol. 2006 Nov;202(1):258-61. doi: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.05.022. Epub
 2006 Jun 27.

Spinal cord injury-specific depression of monosynaptic spinal reflex 
transmission by l-5-hydroxytryptophan results from loss of the 5-HT uptake 
system and not 5-HT receptor supersensitivity.

Honda M(1)
 Tanabe M, Ono H.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of CNS Pharmacology, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Nagoya City University, 3-1 Tanabe-dori, Mizuho-ku, Nagoya 467-8603, Japan.
We studied changes in the spinal segmental reflex and serotonergic (5-HT) 
responses in rats after spinal cord injury (SCI) produced by the weight-dropping 
method at the T8 level.
The spinal monosynaptic reflex amplitude (MSR) was 
recorded from the L5 ventral root following stimulation of the ipsilateral L5 
dorsal root.
The 5-HT precursor l-5-hydroxytryptophan (L-5-HTP) depressed MSR in 
the spinal cord injured rats but not in normal rats.
We investigated whether the 
SCI-specific depression of MSR by L-5-HTP was attributable to postsynaptic 
supersensitivity of 5-HT receptors or presynaptic loss of the 5-HT uptake 
system.
Sumatriptan, a selective 5-HT(1B/1D) receptor agonist that is not taken 
up by 5-HT transporters, depressed the MSR similarly in both SCI and normal 
rats, suggesting that SCI resulted in the loss of 5-HT terminals and not 
postsynaptic supersensitivity of 5-HT receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/j.expneurol.2006.05.022
PMID: 16806182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
EFFECT OF NUCLEOSIDES AND NUCLEOSIDE BASES ON THE DEVELOPMENT OF PRE-IMPLANTATION MOUSE EMBRYOS IN VITRO 1. J Reprod Fertil. 1968 Dec;17(3):571-3. doi: 10.1530/jrf.0.0170571.

Effect of nucleosides and nucleoside bases on the development of 
pre-implantation mouse embryos in vitro.

TenBroeck JT.

DOI: 10.1530/jrf.0.0170571
PMID: 5752109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Blocking the trigeminal EPSP in rat abducens motoneurons in vivo with the AMPA antagonists NBQX and GYKI 53655 1. Brain Res Bull. 2000 May 15;52(2):99-107. doi: 10.1016/s0361-9230(00)00243-4.

Blocking the trigeminal EPSP in rat abducens motoneurons in vivo with the AMPA 
antagonists NBQX and GYKI 53655.

Ruiz A(1)
 Durand J.
Author information:
(1)Unité de Neurocybernétique Cellulaire, Marseille, France.
In pentobarbitone-anaesthetized rats, the effects of two AMPA receptor 
antagonists, the competitive antagonist 2, 
3-dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-benzo-(F)-quinoxaline (NBQX) and the 
non-competitive 2,3-benzodiazepine GYKI 53655, were compared on excitatory 
synaptic transmission of trigeminal origin in intracellularly-recorded abducens 
motoneurons.
The effects of both antagonists were also investigated on the 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl isoxazole-4-propionic acid (AMPA)-, kainate-, and 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA)-induced depression of extracellular antidromic field 
potentials in the abducens motor nucleus.
Microiontophoretic application (< or 
=100 nA) or intravenous injection of NBQX (< or =5 mg/kg) affected both AMPA- 
and kainate-induced depressions whereas GYKI 53655 (< or =100 nA; < or =4 mg/kg) 
blocked only the AMPA-induced depression.
Neither NBQX or GYKI 53655 affected 
NMDA-induced depressions of antidromic field potentials.
Using low intravenous 
(i.v.)
doses of the antagonists NBQX or GYKI 53655 (2-2.5 mg/kg), a complete 
blockade of the composite disynaptic trigeminal excitatory post-synaptic 
potential (EPSP) was obtained without any changes in membrane potential, input 
resistance and antidromic action potentials in abducens motoneurons.
GYKI 53655 
was more potent at low i.v.
doses (0.5-1.8 mg/kg) but NBQX had longer-lasting 
effects.
The results show the existence of differences between the blocking 
action of NBQX and GYKI 53655 on AMPA-mediated receptor EPSP in abducens 
motoneurons.
DOI: 10.1016/s0361-9230(00)00243-4
PMID: 10808079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depressant action of chlordiazepoxide on cardiovascular and respiratory changes induced by aversive electrical stimulation of the brain. 1. Braz J Med Biol Res. 1981 Apr;14(1):69-72.

Depressant action of chlordiazepoxide on cardiovascular and respiratory changes 
induced by aversive electrical stimulation of the brain.

Schenberg LC
 de Aguiar JC, Salgado HC, Graeff FG.
1.
Electrical stimulation of the dorsal periaqueductal gray matter (DPAG), an 
aversive area of the rat brain, increased the mean blood pressure of awake rats 
as well as of animals anesthetized with urethane.
2.
In the anesthetized rats, 
increases in heart rate and in breath rate were also induced by DPAG 
stimulation.
3.
Chlordiazepoxide, a benzodiazepine, decreased the blood pressure 
rise caused by aversive stimulation of the brain in the awake rat.
4.
Chlordiazepoxide elicited the same effect in urethane-anesthetized rats.
In 
addition, the hyperpnea induced by electrical stimulation of the dorsal 
periaqueductal gray matter was also decreased by the drug.
5.
The pressor 
response to intravenous noradrenaline was not affected by chlordiazepoxide.
6.
These results suggest that benzodiazepines attenuate the neurovegetative changes 
accompanying emotion by depressing brain systems that integrate emotional 
behavior.
PMID: 7306724 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Stimulation of noradrenaline synthesis by the calcium ionophore A23187 and its modulation by presynaptic receptors 1. Neurosci Lett. 1985 Dec 4;62(2):187-92. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(85)90353-2.

Stimulation of noradrenaline synthesis by the calcium ionophore A23187 and its 
modulation by presynaptic receptors.

Birch PJ
 Fillenz M.

Noradrenaline (NA) synthesis in rat hippocampal synaptosomes is increased by 
calcium ionophore, A23187, in the presence of calcium.
Activation of presynaptic 
muscarinic, gamma-aminobutyric acidB (GABAB) and alpha 2-adrenergic receptors 
causes inhibition of the ionophore-stimulated synthesis.
The results suggest 
that different mechanisms mediate the depression by presynaptic receptors of NA 
release and NA synthesis.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(85)90353-2
PMID: 3003624 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Impairments in Neurogenesis Are Not Tightly Linked to Depressive Behavior in a Transgenic Mouse Model of Alzheimer's Disease 1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 14;8(11):e79651. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079651. 
eCollection 2013.

Impairments in neurogenesis are not tightly linked to depressive behavior in a 
transgenic mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Iascone DM(1)
 Padidam S, Pyfer MS, Zhang X, Zhao L, Chin J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience and Farber Institute for Neurosciences, Thomas 
Jefferson University, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania, United States of America.
Alzheimer's disease (AD), the most common cause of dementia, is also associated 
with depression.
Although the precise mechanisms that lead to depression in AD 
are unknown, the impairments in adult hippocampal neurogenesis observed in AD 
may play a role.
Adult-born neurons play a critical role in regulating both 
cognition and mood, and reduced hippocampal neurogenesis is associated with 
depression in other neurological disorders.
To assess the relationship between 
Alzheimer's disease, neurogenesis, and depression, we studied human amyloid 
precursor protein (hAPP) transgenic mice, a well-characterized model of AD.
We 
report that reductions in hippocampal neurogenesis are evident early in disease 
progression in hAPP mice, but a mild depressive phenotype manifests only in 
later stages of disease.
We found that hAPP mice exhibited a reduction in 
BrdU-positive cells in the subgranular zone of the dentate gyrus in the 
hippocampus, as well as a reduction in doublecortin-expressing cells, relative 
to nontransgenic controls at 5-7 months of age.
These alterations in 
neurogenesis appeared to worsen with age, as the magnitude of reduction in 
doublecortin-expressing cells was greater in hAPP mice at 13-15 months of age.
Only 13-15 month old hAPP mice exhibited depressive behavior in the tail 
suspension test.
However, mice at both age groups exhibited deficits in spatial 
memory, which was observed in the Morris water maze test for 
hippocampus-dependent memory.
These findings indicate that neurogenesis 
impairments are accompanied by cognitive deficits, but are not tightly linked to 
depressive behavior in hAPP mice.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0079651
PMCID: PMC3828273
PMID: 24244537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interest exist.
Normal motor learning during pharmacological prevention of Purkinje cell long-term depression <jats:p>Systemic delivery of (1R-1-benzo thiophen-5-yl-2[2-diethylamino)-ethoxy] ethanol hydrochloride (T-588) prevented long-term depression (LTD) of the parallel fiber (PF)-Purkinje cell (PC) synapse induced by conjunctive climbing fiber and PF stimulation<jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>. However
 similar concentrations of T-588 in the brains of behaving mice and rats affected neither motor learning in the rotorod test nor the learning of motor timing during classical conditioning of the eyeblink reflex.
Rats given doses of T-588 that prevented PF-PC LTD were as proficient as controls in learning to adapt the timing of their conditioned eyeblink response to a 150- or 350-ms change in the timing of the paradigm.
The experiment indicates that PF-PC LTD under control of the climbing fibers is not required for general motor adaptation or the learning of response timing in two common models of motor learning for which the cerebellum has been implicated.
Alternative mechanisms for motor timing and possible functions for LTD in protection from excitotoxicity are discussed.</jats:p>
Cytokine-Stimulated Nitric Oxide Production Inhibits Mitochondrial Activity in Cardiac Myocytes 1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1995 Aug 24;213(3):1002-9. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.1995.2228.

Cytokine-stimulated nitric oxide production inhibits mitochondrial activity in 
cardiac myocytes.

Oddis CV(1)
 Finkel MS.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pathology, University of Pittsburgh School of Medicine, 
University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, PA 15213-2582, USA.
We have previously proposed that cytokine-stimulated nitric oxide (NO) 
production is responsible for reversible myocardial depression in sepsis, trauma 
and ischemia.
NO previously has been found to inhibit mitochondrial activity in 
other cell types.
Accordingly, we sought to determine if cytokine-stimulated NO 
production inhibited cardiac myocyte mitochondrial activity.
Treatment of 
neonatal rat cardiac myocytes with interleukin-beta (IL-1) resulted in the 
expression of mRNA for inducible NO synthase (iNOS) and stained positively for 
iNOS protein by immunohistochemistry.
No iNOS staining was detected in untreated 
cells.
IL-1 treatment resulted in significant nitrite levels vs control over 48 
hrs (4.2 +/- 0.7 vs 0.3 +/- 0.2 nmol/1.25 x 10(5) cells, respectively) (n = 12) 
that was inhibited by 1mM NMA (0.3 +/- 0.2 nmoles; p < .01; n = 12).
Mitochondrial activity was assessed by the MTT colorimetric assay using 
(3-4,5-dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl tetrazolium bromide and OD 570-630.
Mitochondrial activity was significantly inhibited by IL-1 vs control cells 
(0.436 +/- 0.01 vs 0.608 +/- 0.03) and reversed by 1mM NMA (0.549 +/- 0.03) or 
removal of IL-1 (0.662 +/- 0.02) (p < .01; n = 12 for each).
These data strongly 
suggest that cytokine-stimulated NO production by cardiac myocytes results in 
reversible inhibition of mitochondrial activity.
DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.1995.2228
PMID: 7654217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Symptomatology of chronic brucellosis 1. Br J Ind Med. 1973 Oct;30(4):385-9. doi: 10.1136/oem.30.4.385.

Symptomatology of chronic brucellosis.

McDevitt DG.

McDevitt
 D. G. (1973).British Journal of Industrial Medicine,30, 385-389.
Symptomatology of chronic brucellosis.
A survey of the occurrence of symptoms 
commonly attributed to chronic brucellosis was carried out by questionnaire in 
four different occupational groups in Northern Ireland—veterinary surgeons 
working in private practice, veterinary surgeons employed by the Ministry of 
Agriculture, general medical practitioners, and a group of forestry workers.
The 
veterinary surgeons generally had a higher incidence of symptoms than the other 
two groups.
This could not be accounted for by age, heavy physical exertion or 
professional familiarity with disease but could be related to contact with 
cattle and hence to possible brucella infection.
Of the symptoms investigated, 
sweating, weakness, malaise, irritability, depression, rheumatism, arthritis, 
and backache occurred significantly more often in the veterinary surgeons than 
in the others, with selective differences between the types of veterinary 
practice: the alimentary system symptoms, headache, and insomnia were more 
evenly distributed between all groups and their inclusion as part of the chronic 
brucellosis symptom complex must be seriously questioned.
The lack of 
specificity of the symptoms, their occurrence in normal persons, and the finding 
of high serological brucella antibody titres in asymptomatic persons who are 
exposed to brucella infection emphasize the need for caution against 
overdiagnosis.
This need is illustrated by the fact that a higher proportion of 
Ministry veterinary surgeons unexpectedly complain of symptoms now than five 
years ago.
The incidence of symptoms in this group is now approximately equal to 
that of the veterinary surgeons in private practice, although the latter 
continue to have much greater exposure to brucella infection.
Alternative 
explanations for this increase are discussed.
DOI: 10.1136/oem.30.4.385
PMCID: PMC1069480
PMID: 4270991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The capacity of aluminum to prevent prothrombin depression by quartz 1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1961 Mar;3:188-201. doi:
10.1016/s0041-008x(61)80005-7.

The capacity of aluminum to prevent prothrombin depression by quartz. An 
experimental study on guinea pigs.

SCHEPERS GW.

DOI: 10.1016/s0041-008x(61)80005-7
PMID: 13747491 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression in Lymphocyte Response to General Mitogens by Owl Monkeys Infected With &lt;italic&gt;Herpesvirus saimiri&lt;/italic&gt;&lt;xref ref-type="fn" rid="fn2"&gt;2&lt;/xref&gt; 1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1975 Mar;54(3):679-85.

Depression in lymphocyte response to general mitogens by owl monkeys infected 
with Herpesvirus saimiri.

Wallen WC
 Rabin H, Neubauer RH, Cicmanec JL.
The effect of Herpesvirus saimiri (HVS) infection on the response of owl monkey 
lymphocytes to general mitogens was examined during the development of 
neoplastic disease.
The reactivity of the lymphocytes was then correlated with 
the clinical condition of the infected monkeys and the content of virus rescued 
from the peripheral blood lymphocytes (PBL).
Eight monkeys developed lymphoma 
which, in six monkeys, was accompanied by lymphocytic leukemia.
All animals that 
died of HVS-induced neoplasia consistently showed a lack of mitogenic response 
to phytohemagglutinin and concanavalin A.
The response to pokeweed mitogen, 
while always reduced, was generally less markedly affected than the response to 
the other two mitogens.
Lymphocytes from five of the leukemic animals 
demonstrated an elevated level of spontaneous DNA synthesis in culture late in 
the disease.
This increased spontaneous DNA synthesis tended to correlate with 
the rescue of HVS from the PBL as demonstrated by the infective center assay.
Although mitogenic hyporesponsiveness corresponded with HVS rescue from PBL in 
six of nine monkeys, the impairment of normal lymphocyte responsiveness 
sometimes preceded virus recovery.
PMID: 164565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[N
N'-dibenzylethylenediamine salt of alpha-aminobenzylpenicillin (ampicillin) with prolonged effect].
1.
Antibiotiki.
1969 Sep;14(9):813-7.
[N,N'-dibenzylethylenediamine salt of alpha-aminobenzylpenicillin (ampicillin) 
with prolonged effect].
[Article in Russian]

Lazareva EN, Kovaleva LA, Vasil'ev VK, Braginskaia PS.
PMID: 4982963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Anxiolytic profile of HG1
 a 5-HT-moduline antagonist, in three mouse models of anxiety 1.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol.
2004 Dec;14(6):449-56. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2003.12.004.
Anxiolytic profile of HG1, a 5-HT-moduline antagonist, in three mouse models of 
anxiety.
Clénet F(1), Hascoët M, Fillion G, Galons H, Bourin M.

Author information:
(1)EA 3256 Neurobiologie de l'anxiété et de la dépression, Faculté de Médecine, 
BP 53508, 1 rue Gaston Veil, 44035 Nantes cedex 01, France.
HG1 is a new 5-HT-moduline antagonist which is itself an endogenous tetrapeptide 
specifically acting as an antagonist of 5-HT(1B) auto- and heteroreceptors.
Blockade of endogenous 5-HT-moduline might provoke anxiolysis, so it could be a 
new therapeutic target in anxiety disorders.
The aim of our study was to examine 
the effects of HG1 in three mouse models of anxiety: the four plates test (FPT), 
the black and white (B&W) model and the elevated plus maze (EPM).
Male Swiss 
mice were intraperitoneally and acutely administered HG1 at the doses of 8, 16, 
32 and 64 mg/kg.
In these three tests, HG1 exhibited an anxiolytic profile 
similar to that of diazepam, the referential benzodiazepine compound, without 
affecting locomotor activity.
In the three models used, HG1 was as efficient as 
benzodiazepine and may consequently exert its anxiolytic effects via the 
GABA-ergic system.
We cannot exclude that it might also act through 5-HT 
receptors and rather have the profile of a selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor.
DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2003.12.004
PMID: 15589384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Late Metastatic Leishmaniasis in the Mouse 1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1983 Mar;32(2):277-85. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.1983.32.277.

Late metastatic Leishmaniasis in the mouse. A model for mucocutaneous disease.

Barral A
 Petersen EA, Sacks DL, Neva FA.
BALB/c, C57B1/6 and (BALB/c x C57B1/6)F1 mice all proved susceptible to 
infection by a strain of Leishmania isolated from a Central Brazilian with 
espundia.
The course of disease differed markedly between BALB/c and C57B1/6 
mice.
BALB/c mice suffered from a rapidly progressive and widely metastatic, but 
non-ulcerative, disease resembling diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis.
In contrast, 
C57B1/6 mice initially contained parasite multiplication effectively and 
appeared clinically cured.
However, the parasite could persistently be cultured 
up to about 1 year post-infection.
At that time, the parasite load in the 
infected footpad increased and a patent disease developed characterized by 
distinctive ulcerative metastases with destruction of soft-tissue in the nasal 
region similar to the one observed in espundia.
Development of disease in both 
strains of mice was associated with depression of cell-mediated immunity as 
monitored by delayed-type hypersensitivity in vivo and lymphocyte transformation 
in vitro.
Thus, our study suggests that diffuse cutaneous leishmaniasis and 
espundia can be caused by the same strain of parasite, and that the particular 
clinical expression in the individual mouse is determined by the host response.
DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1983.32.277
PMID: 6837839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
ASAS Centennial Paper: Future research in physiology and endocrinology 1. J Anim Sci. 2009 Jan;87(1):384-9. doi: 10.2527/jas.2008-1368. Epub 2008 Sep 2.

ASAS Centennial Paper: Future research in physiology and endocrinology.

Seidel GE Jr(1).

Author information:
(1)Animal Reproduction and Biotechnology Laboratory
 Colorado State University, 
Fort Collins 80523-1683, USA.
gseidel@colostate.edu

Over the next quarter century in North America, the following eventualities are 
likely for physiology and endocrinology research with agricultural animals.
1) 
Total funding adjusted for inflation will change little but will come less from 
public sources, and most of that will be in the context of human health.
Much of 
the privately funded research will be herd specific and remain proprietary.
2) 
The numbers of MS, PhD, and postdoctoral students probably will decrease, but 
research in the context of credentialing will remain important.
3) Resources 
such as expanded databases in genomics and proteomics, and remarkable new tools 
such as small inhibitory RNA will continue to become available, likely at a 
faster rate than in the previous 25 yr. 4) The huge amounts of data from 
production agriculture will make agricultural animals ideal models for some 
kinds of basic research, such as studying fetal programming, resulting in 
synergy with more applied research.
Most of these experimental animals will be 
in private production herds and flocks, even when work is publicly funded.
5) 
The trend toward more interdisciplinary research will continue, especially 
considering interactions among reproduction, health, nutrition, selective 
breeding, management factors, and societal concerns; reductionist research 
probing deeper into cellular and molecular mechanisms will remain important, as 
will whole-animal approaches.
6) Agricultural animals are a product of evolution 
plus selective breeding.
Insights drawn from the former will aid progress in the 
latter.
One focus of research in physiology and endocrinology will be 
understanding heterosis, inbreeding depression, and epigenetic effects as it 
becomes possible to manipulate and identify the allelic structure of individual 
animals.
7) Additional insightful concepts will evolve that will simplify 
thinking in some respects, such as the maternal to embryonic shift in 
transcribed RNA in early embryos; however, animal biology will turn out to be 
even more complex than most of us currently imagine.
DOI: 10.2527/jas.2008-1368
PMID: 18765843 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Animal model of depression. III. Mechanism of action of tetrabenazine. 1. Biol Psychiatry. 1978 Aug;13(4):429-43.

Animal model of depression. III. Mechanism of action of tetrabenazine.

Tachiki KH
 Takagi A, Tateishi T, Kido A, Nishiwaki K, Nakamura E, Nagayama H, 
Takahashi R.

A study was undertaken to gain an understanding of the biochemical mechanism 
whereby tetrabenazine (TBZ) produces a sedative effect on the locomotor activity 
of rats.
Rats injected with L-5-hydroxytryptophan (L-5-HTP, 30 mg/kg), the 
immediate precursor of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), showed the characteristic 
bison appearance, pitosis, and catalepsy normally observed after injecting TBZ 
(30 mg/kg).
The treatment of rats with low doses of L-5-HTP (9 mg/kg) plus TBZ 
(2 mg/kg) significantly decreased locomotor activity, whereas low doses of 
either one of these drugs given alone had no significant effect on locomotor 
activity.
The level of 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA) was elevated in the 
brain of rats sacrificed 3 hr after treatment with low doses of either L-5-HTP 
or TBZ alone.
Treatment of rats with p-chlorophenylalanine to inhibit the 
synthesis of 5-HT had an inhibitory effect on the duration of sedation following 
an injection of TBZ (30 mg/kg).
The results of the biochemical and 
pharmacological studies as reflected by changes in locomotor activity were 
interpreted to indicate that the sedative action of TBZ was due to an excess of 
functional 5-HT.
PMID: 150867 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Prevention of carcinogen-induced mouse skin papilloma by whole fruit aqueous extract of Momordica charantia 1. Eur J Cancer Prev. 2000 Aug;9(4):283-8. doi: 10.1097/00008469-200008000-00009.

Prevention of carcinogen-induced mouse skin papilloma by whole fruit aqueous 
extract of Momordica charantia.

Ganguly C(1)
 De S, Das S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cancer Chemoprevention, Chittaranjan National Cancer Institute, 
Calcutta, India.
The anticarcinogenic effect of aqueous extract of fruit of Momordica charantia 
(bitter gourd), which is widely used as a vegetable in India, was studied in a 
two-step skin carcinogenesis model in mice.
The possible mode of action was also 
investigated.
Oral administration of the fruit extract was found to have an 
adverse effect on the general health and lifespan of the animals when used at a 
high concentration.
But when this dose was reduced by half, the test extract 
afforded protection from the development of skin tumour and increased life 
expectancy.
Carcinogen-induced lipid peroxidation in liver and DNA damage in 
lymphocytes were found to be reduced following treatment with Momordica.
The 
fruit extract was found to significantly activate the liver enzymes 
glutathione-S-transferase, glutathione peroxidase and catalase (P < 0.001), 
which showed a depression following exposure to the carcinogen.
The results 
suggest a preventive role of water-soluble constituents of M. charantia fruit 
during carcinogenesis, which is mediated possibly by their modulatory effect on 
enzymes of the biotransformation and detoxification system of the host.
DOI: 10.1097/00008469-200008000-00009
PMID: 10958332 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Association Between 5HT1b Receptor Gene and Methamphetamine Dependence 1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2011 Mar;9(1):163-8. doi: 10.2174/157015911795017137.

Association Between 5HT1b Receptor Gene and Methamphetamine Dependence.

Ujike H(1)
 Kishimoto M, Okahisa Y, Kodama M, Takaki M, Inada T, Uchimura N, 
Yamada M, Iwata N, Iyo M, Sora I, Ozaki N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, Okayama, Japan.
Several lines of evidence implicate serotonergic dysfunction in diverse 
psychiatric disorders including anxiety, depression, and drug abuse.
Mice with a 
knock-out of the 5HT1b receptor gene (HTR1B) displayed increased locomotor 
response to cocaine and elevated motivation to self-administer cocaine and 
alcohol.
Previous genetic studies showed significant associations of HTR1B with 
alcohol dependence and substance abuse, but were followed by inconsistent 
results.
We examined a case-control genetic association study of HTR1B with 
methamphetamine-dependence patients in a Japanese population.
The subjects were 
231 patients with methamphetamine dependence, 214 of whom had a co-morbidity of 
methamphetamine psychosis, and 248 age- and sex-matched healthy controls.
The 
three single nucleotide polymorphisms (SNPs), rs130058 (A-165T), rs1228814 
(A-700C) and rs1228814 (A+1180G) of HTR1B were genotyped.
There was no 
significant difference in allelic and genotypic distributions of the SNPs 
between methamphetamine dependence and the control.
Genetic associations of 
HTR1B were tested with several clinical phenotypes of methamphetamine dependence 
and/or psychosis, such as age at first abuse, duration of latency from the first 
abuse to onset of psychosis, prognosis of psychosis after therapy, and 
complication of spontaneous relapse of psychotic state.
There was, however, no 
asscocation between any SNP and the clinical phenotypes.
Haplotype analyses 
showed the three SNPs examined were within linkage disequilibrium, which implied 
that the three SNPs covered the whole HTR1B, and distribution of estimated 
haplotype frequency was not different between the groups.
The present findings 
may indicate that HTR1B does not play a major role in individual susceptibility 
to methamphetamine dependence or development of methamphetamine-induced 
psychosis.
DOI: 10.2174/157015911795017137
PMCID: PMC3137174
PMID: 21886584
Suppression of ACTH Release from Adenohypophysis by Corticosterone: An<i>in Vitro</i>Study 1. Endocrinology. 1970 Aug;87(2):371-6. doi: 10.1210/endo-87-2-371.

Suppression of ACTH release from adenophypophysis by corticosterone: an in vitro 
study.

Kraicer J
 Milligan JV.
DOI: 10.1210/endo-87-2-371
PMID: 4316573 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Behavioral and pharmacological studies on doxepin
 a tricyclic agent.
3.
Comparison of actions of doxepin and diazepam on approach-withdrawal and approach-avoidance conflict schedules].
1.
Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi.
1972 Sep;68(5):560-71.
[Behavioral and pharmacological studies on doxepin, a tricyclic agent.
3.
Comparison of actions of doxepin and diazepam on approach-withdrawal and 
approach-avoidance conflict schedules].
[Article in Japanese]

Ogawa H, Tadokoro S.

PMID: 4674708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dopamine induces a GluN2A-dependent form of long-term depression of NMDA synaptic responses in the nucleus accumbens 1. Neuropharmacology. 2011 May;60(6):975-81. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.01.047.  Epub 2011 Feb 2.

Dopamine induces a GluN2A-dependent form of long-term depression of NMDA 
synaptic responses in the nucleus accumbens.

Chergui K(1).

Author information:
(1)The Karolinska Institute
 Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Section 
of Molecular Neurophysiology, Von Eulers väg 8, 171 77 Stockholm, Sweden.
karima.chergui@ki.se

Natural rewards and addictive drugs are believed to exert their reinforcing 
actions by influencing synaptic plasticity in reward-related brain regions such 
as the nucleus accumbens (NAc).
Long-lasting changes in the efficacy of 
excitatory synaptic transmission in the NAc are critically dependent on 
efficient interactions between the dopaminergic and the glutamatergic 
neurotransmitter systems.
Potential targets to the actions of dopamine and of 
addictive drugs include the GluN2 subunits that compose the N-Methyl-D-Aspartate 
(NMDA) type of glutamate receptors.
However, the ability of dopamine to induce 
synaptic plasticity by modulating specific subunits of the NMDA receptor has not 
been examined.
The present study shows that in the mouse NAc, dopamine produces 
a long-lasting depression of NMDA responses which occludes long-term depression 
(LTD) induced by high frequency stimulation (HFS) of glutamatergic fibers.
LTD 
induced by dopamine or by HFS does not involve a change in the subunit 
composition of NMDA receptors.
Although GluN2B contributes to synaptic responses 
in the NAc and is affected by dopamine, this subunit might not be a direct 
target to the actions of dopamine.
The results, however, identify a critical 
role for GluN2A in dopamine-induced and HFS-induced synaptic plasticity.
This 
study suggests a possible mechanism of action for dopamine in the regulation of 
reward-related behaviors.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.01.047
PMID: 21295045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Calcium absorption in diphosphonate‐treated rats: effect of parathyroid function
 dietary calcium and phosphorus.
<jats:p>1.
The role of parathyroid hormone (PTH) and 1, 25‐dihydroxy‐cholecalciferol (1,25‐(OH)2D3) in modulation of intestinal Ca absorption was studied in rats, using disodium ethane‐1‐hydroxy‐1,1‐diphosphonate (EHDP), which is known to reduce 1,25‐(OH)2D3 formation.
2.
EHDP decreased intestinal Ca absorption.
This effect could be abolished by small amounts of 1,25‐(OH)2D3, whereas even large doses of PTH were ineffective.
EHDP also decreased Ca absorption in thyroparathyroidectomized (TPTX) rats.
Therefore the effect of EHDP on 1,25‐(OH)2D3 production is unlikely to be mediated through PTH.
3.
The correction by PTH of the decreased Ca absorption in TPTX rats was inhibited by EHDP.
Since EHDP inhibits formation of 1,25‐(OH)2D3 the effect of PTH on Ca absorption is likely to be mediated through this vitamin D3 metabolite.
4.
In normal rats both a low Ca and a low P diet stimulated Ca absorption.
In EHDP‐treated intact rats low Ca still stimulated Ca absorption, whereas the effect of low P abolished.
This indicates that low Ca and low P diets affect Ca absorption through different mechanisms.
5.
Intestinal adaptation to a low Ca diet was still observed in EHDP‐treated TPTX rats.
Thus, in the rat, intestinal adaptation to low Ca diet can occur without PTH.</jats:p>
Changes in the rate of epithelial proliferation of rat oral mucosa in response to acute inflammation induced by turpentine 1. Arch Oral Biol. 1986;31(3):193-9. doi: 10.1016/0003-9969(86)90127-5.

Changes in the rate of epithelial proliferation of rat oral mucosa in response 
to acute inflammation induced by turpentine.

Willoughby SG
 Hopps RM, Johnson NW.
Inflammatory lesions were produced in the buccal mucosa by a subepithelial 
injection of turpentine; animals were killed 24 h later, 1 h after an 
intravenous injection of tritiated thymidine ( [3H]-Tdr).
Control rats were 
given [3H]-Tdr but no turpentine.
Lesions comprised a turpentine pool surrounded 
by a dense layer of inflammatory cells, beyond which the tissues were more 
diffusely inflamed.
The labelling index (L.I.)
for mitotic activity in overlying 
epithelium was determined in a region (C) close to the layer of dense 
infiltration and in a region (D) more distant.
The L.I.
in region D was over 
four times greater than in region C, and nearly four times greater than that of 
the contralateral, uninjected cheek.
The L.I.
in the uninjected cheek was 
significantly lower than that in controls, which may indicate a systemic 
depression of proliferative activity in the experimental animals, probably due 
to stress.
Thus mild inflammatory injury stimulates epithelial proliferation, 
whereas more severe inflammation depresses it, perhaps due to more extensive 
progenitor-cell damage.
DOI: 10.1016/0003-9969(86)90127-5
PMID: 3459408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The quetiapine active metabolite N-desalkylquetiapine and the neurotensin NTS₁ receptor agonist PD149163 exhibit antidepressant-like effects on operant responding in male rats. 1. Exp Clin Psychopharmacol. 2014 Dec;22(6):548-56. doi: 10.1037/a0038156. Epub 
2014 Oct 6.

The quetiapine active metabolite N-desalkylquetiapine and the neurotensin NTS₁ 
receptor agonist PD149163 exhibit antidepressant-like effects on operant 
responding in male rats.

Hillhouse TM(1)
 Shankland Z(1), Matazel KS(1), Keiser AA(1), Prus AJ(1).
Author information:
(1)Psychology Department, Northern Michigan University.
Major depressive disorder is the most common mood disorder in the United States 
and European Union; however, the limitations of clinically available 
antidepressant drugs have led researchers to pursue novel pharmacological 
treatments.
Clinical studies have reported that monotherapy with the atypical 
antipsychotic drug quetiapine produces a rapid reduction in depressive symptoms 
that is apparent after 1 week of treatment, and it is possible that the active 
metabolite N-desalkylquetiapine, which structurally resembles an antidepressant 
drug, produces antidepressant effects.
Neuropharmacological evaluations of the 
neurotensin NTS1 receptor agonist PD149163 suggest antidepressant efficacy, but 
the effects of a NTS₁ receptor agonist in an antidepressant animal model have 
yet to be reported.
The present study examined the antidepressant-like effects 
of N-desalkylquetiapine, PD14916, quetiapine, the tricyclic antidepressant drug 
imipramine, the atypical antipsychotic drug risperidone, and the typical 
antipsychotic drug raclopride on responding in male Sprague-Dawley rats trained 
on a differential-reinforcement-of-low-rate 72-s operant schedule, a procedure 
used for screening antidepressant drugs.
Quetiapine, PD149163, risperidone, and 
imipramine exhibited antidepressant-like effects by increasing the number of 
reinforcers earned, decreasing the number of responses emitted, and shifting the 
interresponse time (IRT) distributions to the right.
N-Desalkylquetiapine 
produced a partial antidepressant-like effect by decreasing the number of 
responses emitted and producing a rightward shift in the IRT distributions, but 
it did not significantly alter the number of reinforcers earned.
Raclopride 
decreased reinforcers and responses.
These data suggest that 
N-desalkylquetiapine likely contributes to quetiapine's antidepressant efficacy 
and identify NTS₁ receptor activation as a potential novel pharmacologic 
strategy for antidepressant drugs.
PsycINFO Database Record (c) 2014 APA, all rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1037/a0038156
PMID: 25285844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of lanthanum ions on function and structure of frog neuromuscular junctions <jats:p>
            1. Electrophysiological and electron-microscopic studies were made of the effect of lan­thanum ions on frog neuromuscular junctions. 2. In the presence of 1 mM La
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            
 nerve impulses continued to invade the nerve terminals but ceased to release transmitter.
3.
Lanthanum caused a rapid and large increase in the frequency of miniature end-plate potentials; presumably because La activates the mechanism of transmitter release without the usual prerequisite of presynaptic membrane depolarization.
At 4 °C, La caused a 10000-fold, or even larger increase in the rate of leakage of transmitter quanta.
Such high rate of trans­mitter release was not accompanied by obvious changes in electron-microscopic structure of the nerve terminals.
4.
With continued La-treatment, the frequency of miniature end-plate potentials subsides slowly until they are no longer detectable at most end-plates.
During this period the number of synaptic vesicles is reduced until practically all the endings become completely depleted of synaptic vesicles.
In contrast, coated vesicles and membrane-bound tubes and cysternae become more numerous.
</jats:p>
Repeated ECS differentially affects rat brain 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptor expression 1. Neuroreport. 1995 Apr 19;6(6):901-4. doi: 10.1097/00001756-199504190-00019.

Repeated ECS differentially affects rat brain 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptor 
expression.

Burnet PW(1)
 Mead A, Eastwood SL, Lacey K, Harrison PJ, Sharp T.

Author information:
(1)University Department of Psychiatry, Radcliffe Infirmary, Oxford, UK.
We investigated the effect of electroconvulsive shock (ECS), administered five 
times over 10 days, on 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptor mRNA and binding site 
densities in the rat brain using in situ hybridization histochemistry and 
quantitative autoradiography.
ECS treatment increased 5-HT1A receptor mRNA 
abundance and binding site densities in the dentate gyrus, but decreased these 
parameters in the CA3c layer of the hippocampus.
No changes in 5-HT1A receptor 
mRNA and binding sites occurred in other hippocampal subfields, neocortex or 
raphe nuclei.
Repeated ECS was also found to increase 5-HT2A receptor binding 
site densities in the neocortex and this was accompanied by a non-significant 
increase in cortical 5-HT2A receptor mRNA abundance.
Our study demonstrates that 
in the rat, repeated ECS produces anatomically and molecularly discrete effects 
on 5-HT1A and 5-HT2A receptor gene expression.
These changes may be relevant to 
the therapeutic effect of repeated ECS in depression.
DOI: 10.1097/00001756-199504190-00019
PMID: 7612879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Shortened onset of action of antidepressants in major depression using acetylsalicylic acid augmentation: a pilot open-label study 1. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006 Jul;21(4):227-31. doi: 
10.1097/00004850-200607000-00005.

Shortened onset of action of antidepressants in major depression using 
acetylsalicylic acid augmentation: a pilot open-label study.

Mendlewicz J(1)
 Kriwin P, Oswald P, Souery D, Alboni S, Brunello N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Erasme Hospital, Free University of Brussels, 
Belgium.
jmendlew@ulb.ac.be

Based on our preclinical data showing a potential accelerating effect of 
acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) in combination with fluoxetine in an animal model of 
depression, we examined the effect of ASA augmentation therapy on selective 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRI) in major depressed non-responder patients.
Twenty-four non-responder patients having received at least 4 weeks of an 
adequate SSRI treatment were included in a pilot open-label study.
Participants 
were treated openly during 4 weeks with 160 mg/day ASA in addition to their 
current antidepressant treatment.
The combination SSRI-ASA was associated with a 
response rate of 52.4%.
Remission was achieved in 43% of the total sample and 
82% of the responder sample.
In the responder group, a significant improvement 
was observed within week 1 (mean Hamilton Depression Rating Scale-21 items at 
day 0=29.3+/-4.5, at day 7=14.0+/-4.1; P<0.0001) and remained sustained until 
day 28.
Despite limitations due to the open nature of this study, our 
preliminary results confirm our preclinical findings and are in favour of an 
accelerating effect of ASA in combination with SSRIs in the treatment of major 
depression.
Potential physiological and biochemical mechanisms may involve an 
anti-inflammatory and/or neurotrophic effect.
DOI: 10.1097/00004850-200607000-00005
PMID: 16687994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Diene Valepotriates from Valeriana glechomifolia on Na+/K+-ATPase Activity in the Cortex and Hippocampus of Mice 1. Planta Med. 2015 Feb;81(3):200-7. doi: 10.1055/s-0034-1396200. Epub 2015 Jan
23.

Effects of diene valepotriates from Valeriana glechomifolia on Na+/K+-ATPase 
activity in the cortex and hippocampus of mice.

Müller LG(1)
 Salles L(1), Lins HA(2), Feijó PR(2), Cassel E(3), Vargas R(3), 
von Poser GL(1), Noël F(2), Quintas LE(2), Rates SM(1).
Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós Graduação em Ciências Farmacêuticas, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
(2)Laboratório de Farmacologia Bioquímica e Molecular, Instituto de Ciências 
Biomédicas, Universidade Federal do Rio de Janeiro, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil.
(3)Faculdade de Engenharia, Departamento de Engenharia Química, Pontifícia 
Universidade Católica do Rio Grande do Sul, Porto Alegre, Brazil.
Diene valepotriates obtained from Valeriana glechomifolia present 
antidepressant-like activity, mediated by dopaminergic and noradrenergic 
neurotransmissions.
Also, previous studies have shown inhibitory activity of 
diene valepotriates towards Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase from the rat brain in vitro.
Nevertheless, in vivo studies regarding the action of diene valepotriates on 
this enzyme are still lacking.
Considering that Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase cerebral 
activity is involved in depressive disorders, the aim of this study was to 
investigate the effects of acute (5 mg/kg, p. o.)
and repeated (5 mg/kg, p. o., 
once a day for three days) diene valepotriate administration on 
Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase activity in the cortex and hippocampus of mice submitted or 
not submitted to the forced swimming test.
In addition, the protein expression 
of Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase α1, α2, and α3 isoforms in the cortex of mice repeatedly 
treated with diene valepotriates (and submitted or not submitted to the forced 
swimming test) was investigated.
Diene valepotriates significantly decreased 
mice immobility time in the forced swimming test when compared to the control 
group.
Only the animals repeatedly treated with diene valepotriates presented 
increased Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase activity in the cerebral cortex, and the exposure to 
the forced swimming test counteracted the effects of the diene valepotriates.
No 
alterations in the hippocampal Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase activity were observed.
Repeated diene valepotriate administration increased the cortical content of the 
α2 isoform, but the α3 isoform protein expression was augmented only in mice 
repeatedly treated with diene valepotriates and forced to swim.
Mice treated 
with the vehicle and submitted to the forced swimming test also presented an 
increase in the content of the α2 isoform, but no alterations in 
Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase activity.
These results suggest that cortical 
Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase may represent a molecular target of the diene valepotriates in 
vivo and long-term regulatory mechanisms are involved in this effect.
Also, the 
forced swimming test per se influences the protein expression of 
Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase isoforms and counteracts the effects of the diene 
valepotriates on cortical Na(+)/K(+)-ATPase.
Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0034-1396200
PMID: 25615276 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Clinicomorphological studies in chicks fed ochratoxin A while simultaneously developing coccidiosis. 1. Vet Res Commun. 2002 Apr;26(3):189-204. doi: 10.1023/a:1015201604241.

Clinicomorphological studies in chicks fed ochratoxin A while simultaneously 
developing coccidiosis.

Stoev SD(1)
 Koynarsky V, Mantle PG.
Author information:
(1)Department of General and Clinical Pathology, Thracian University, Stara 
Zagora, Bulgaria.
s_stoev@hotmail.com

The progression of coccidiosis and the resultant mortality were followed in 
chicks fed a OTA-contaminated diet.
More complex and rapid progress of 
coccidiosis occurred in OTA-treated chicks than in chicks fed a OTA-free diet.
The concentration of total protein in the serum was significantly decreased in 
the chicks in the OTA-treated group, whereas this was significantly increased in 
chicks infected with Eimeria tenella, irrespective of additional treatment with 
OTA.
The serum glucose concentration was significantly increased in all the 
chicks exposed to OTA and/or suffering from coccidiosis, as was serum retention 
of uric acid in all groups, most notably in those consuming OTA.
OTA induced 
degenerative changes in, and an increase in the weight of the kidneys, liver, 
heart and ventriculum; there was depletion of lymphoid tissue and a decrease in 
the lymphoid organs' weight and body weight.
Coccidiosis induced only a slight 
growth depression and a slight increase in the relative weight of the kidneys 
and liver.
The intensity of the clinical signs, the impairment of kidney 
function, macroscopic and histopathological changes, deviations in the weight of 
some organs and general depression in growth were greater when chicks infected 
with E. tenella were also given OTA.
DOI: 10.1023/a:1015201604241
PMID: 12090291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Different effects of psychotropic drugs on delayed hypersensitivity responses in mice 1. J Neuroimmunol. 1985 Jul;9(1-2):81-5. doi: 10.1016/s0165-5728(85)80008-4.

Different effects of psychotropic drugs on delayed hypersensitivity responses in 
mice.

Descotes J
 Tedone R, Evreux JC.
The influence of certain psychotropic drugs on the delayed-type hypersensitivity 
(DTH) response to sheep red blood cells in BALB/c mice was studied.
The effects 
on the overall response and the induction and elicitation phases were evaluated, 
using two alternative dosage schedules for each agent.
It was found that 
diazepam had no effect on the DTH reaction but the administration of imipramine, 
haloperidol, chlorpromazine or meprobramate all resulted in depression of the 
response, impairing both the induction or elicitation phases.
The results 
indicate that psychotropic drugs may produce in vivo depression of cell-mediated 
immunity by different mechanisms.
DOI: 10.1016/s0165-5728(85)80008-4
PMID: 4008639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The atropine-like action
 not removed by naloxone, of the opioid dermorphin on the inotropic effects of acetylcholine].
1.
Nauchnye Doki Vyss Shkoly Biol Nauki.
1990;(10):80-5.
[The atropine-like action, not removed by naloxone, of the opioid dermorphin on 
the inotropic effects of acetylcholine].
[Article in Russian]

Sokolova NA, Krasil'nikova VG, Ashmarin IP.
Opioid dermorphin induced a negative inotropic effect on the isolated perfused 
by Straube frog's heart, this effect was blocked by naloxone.
On the background 
of dermorphin negative inotropic effect acetylcholine inhibited the ventricular 
contractile activity to the same degree as in the control experiments before 
dermorphin injection.
But after the combined infusion of naloxone and dermorphin 
removed the opioid inotropic effect, the negative inotropic effect of 
acetylcholine became significantly weaker than in the control.
It has been 
concluded that there are opiate receptors in the frog's ventricular myocardium, 
their activation leads to the negative inotropic effect.
Dermorphin may act like 
atropine on the inotropic effects of acetylcholine, this action doesn't depend 
on the opiate receptors activation.
PMID: 2275946 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of the antidepressant/antipanic drug phenelzine and its putative metabolite phenylethylidenehydrazine on extracellular γ-aminobutyric acid levels in the striatum11Abbreviations: DA
 dopamine; GABA, γ-aminobutyric acid; GABA-T, GABA transaminase; 5-HT, 5-hydroxytryptamine or serotonin; MAO, monoamine oxidase; N2-acetylPLZ, N2-acetylphenelzine; NE, norepinephrine; PEH, phenylethylidenehydrazine; and PLZ, phenelzine, 2-phenylethylhydrazine.
1.
Biochem Pharmacol.
2002 Jan 1;63(1):57-64. doi: 10.1016/s0006-2952(01)00856-5.
Effects of the antidepressant/antipanic drug phenelzine and its putative 
metabolite phenylethylidenehydrazine on extracellular gamma-aminobutyric acid 
levels in the striatum.
Parent MB(1), Master S, Kashlub S, Baker GB.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Alberta, Edmonton, Canada.
psymbp@langate.gsu.edu

Phenelzine (PLZ) is a non-selective monoamine oxidase inhibitor (MAOI) commonly 
used to treat depression and panic disorder.
As expected, PLZ increases brain 
levels of dopamine, norepinephrine, and serotonin.
Interestingly, PLZ also 
elevates brain levels of gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and previous studies 
have suggested that these increases may also contribute to the anxiolytic 
effects of PLZ.
Using in vivo microdialysis in conscious, freely moving rats, 
combined with high performance liquid chromatography, the present experiments 
determined that PLZ (15 or 30 mg/kg, free base weight) increases extracellular 
levels of GABA in the caudate-putamen and nucleus accumbens.
The results also 
indicated that phenylethylidenehydrazine (PEH; 29.6 mg/kg, free base weight), a 
putative intermediate metabolite of PLZ that is not an MAOI, also significantly 
increases extracellular GABA levels in the caudate-putamen.
These findings 
provide further evidence that GABA may play an important role in the actions of 
PLZ and suggest that PEH should be pursued further as a GABAergic drug in its 
own right.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-2952(01)00856-5
PMID: 11754874 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Oxidative Stress and Antioxidant Parameters in Patients With Major Depressive Disorder Compared to Healthy Controls Before and After Antidepressant Treatment 1. J Clin Psychiatry. 2015 Dec;76(12):1658-67. doi: 10.4088/JCP.14r09179.

Oxidative stress and antioxidant parameters in patients with major depressive 
disorder compared to healthy controls before and after antidepressant treatment: 
results from a meta-analysis.

Jiménez-Fernández S(1)(2)
 Gurpegui M, Díaz-Atienza F, Pérez-Costillas L, 
Gerstenberg M, Correll CU.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and CTS-549 Research Group, Institute of 
Neurosciences, Center for Biomedical Research (CIBM), University of Granada, 
Granada, Spain.
(2)Child and Adolescent Mental Health Unit, Jaén Medical Center, Jaén, Spain.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the role of oxidative stress and antioxidants in 
depression.
DATA SOURCES: We searched the literature without language restrictions through 
MEDLINE/PubMed, Cochrane Library, Fisterra, and Galenicom from database 
inception until December 31, 2013, supplemented by a hand search of relevant 
articles.
Search terms included (1) oxidative stress, antioxidant*, nitrosative 
stress, nitrative stress, nitro-oxidative stress, free radical*, and names of 
individual oxidative stress markers/antioxidants and (2) depression and related 
disorders and antidepressant.
STUDY SELECTION: Included were studies in patients with depression comparing 
antioxidant or oxidative stress markers with those in healthy controls before 
and after antidepressant treatment.
DATA EXTRACTION: Two authors independently extracted the data for antioxidant or 
oxidative stress markers.
Standardized mean differences (SMDs) ± 95% confidence 
intervals (CIs) for results from ≥ 3 studies were calculated.
DATA SYNTHESIS: Altogether, 29 studies (N = 3,961; patients with depression = 
2,477, healthy controls = 1,484) reported on the oxidative stress marker 
malondialdehyde (MDA) and total nitrites, the antioxidants uric acid and zinc, 
or the antioxidant-enhancing enzymes superoxide dismutase (SOD), catalase (CAT), 
and glutathione peroxidase (GPX).
When patients with depression were compared 
with healthy controls, depression was associated with higher oxidative stress 
MDA levels (8 studies; n = 916; SMD = 1.34; 95% CI, 0.57 to 2.11; P < .001), 
lower antioxidant uric acid (4 studies; n = 512; SMD = -0.64; 95% CI, -1.22 to 
-0.06; P = .030) and zinc levels (13 studies; n = 2,002; SMD = -0.66; 95% CI, 
-0.98 to -0.34; P < .0001), and higher antioxidant-enhancing enzyme SOD levels 
(11 studies; n = 902; SMD = 0.62; 95% CI, 0.07 to 1.17; P = .028), while 
differences in total nitrites and CAT and GPX were nonsignificant.
Antidepressant treatment, which significantly reduced Hamilton Depression Rating 
Scale scores (24.6 ± 0.7 to 16.2 ± 1.6; SMD = 2.65; 95% CI, 1.13 to 4.15; P = 
.00065), reduced MDA (4 studies; n = 194; SMD = -1.45; 95% CI, -2.43 to -0.47; P 
= .004) and increased uric acid (3 studies; n = 212; SMD = 0.76; 95% CI, 0.03 to 
1.49; P = .040) and zinc levels (3 studies; n = 65; SMD = 1.22; 95% CI, 0.40 to 
2.04, P = .004), without differences in MDA (P = .60), uric acid (P = .10), and 
zinc (P = .163) levels compared to healthy controls.
CONCLUSIONS: Results suggest that oxidative stress plays a role in depression 
and that antidepressant activity may be mediated via improving oxidative 
stress/antioxidant function.
© Copyright 2015 Physicians Postgraduate Press, Inc.

DOI: 10.4088/JCP.14r09179
PMID: 26579881 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Renal bicarbonate reabsorption during bicarbonate loading 1. Kidney Int. 1980 May;17(5):577-85. doi: 10.1038/ki.1980.68.

Renal bicarbonate reabsorption during bicarbonate loading.

Monclair T
 Mathisen O, Kiil F.

To examine bicarbonate reabsorption at different GFR's, we varied the renal 
perfusion pressure in anesthetized dogs after inhibiting autoregulation by 
expanding extracellular volume and infusing ethacrynic acid.
At a plasma 
bicarbonate concentration (PHCO3) of 28 +/- 1 mM, bicarbonate reabsorption 
varied in proportion to GFR (glomerulotubular balance).
When PHCO3 was raised to 
52 +/- 2 mM at constant PCO2 and hematocrit, bicarbonate reabsorption was 
reduced at all levels of filtered load.
When plotted against GFR, different 
results were obtained dependent on the GFR level examined.
At the control GFR,.
bicarbonate loading reduced bicarbonate reabsorption by 30 +/- 5%.
At a GFR 
level about 50% below the control GFR, bicarbonate loading increased 
reabsorption by about one third because the inhibitory effect of raising PHCO3 
and extracellular pH was not sufficient to counteract the stimulatory effect of 
a higher filtered load.
At intermediate levels of GFR, a rise in PHCO3 did not 
alter bicarbonate reabsorption.
The finding that acetazolamide (30 mg/kg of body 
wt) at high PHCO3 failed to reduce bicarbonate reabsorption supports the 
hypothesis that the depressive effect of high extracellular pH on bicarbonate 
reabsorption may be attributed to reduced net tubular hydrogen ion secretion.
DOI: 10.1038/ki.1980.68
PMID: 7401459 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The radioprotective effects of psychotropic drugs 1. Experientia. 1970;26(7):771. doi: 10.1007/BF02232541.

The radioprotective effects of psychotropic drugs.

Locker A
 Weish P.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02232541
PMID: 5431151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Developmental nicotine exposure induced alterations in behavior and glutamate receptor function in hippocampus 1. Cell Mol Life Sci. 2012 Mar;69(5):829-41. doi: 10.1007/s00018-011-0805-4. Epub
 2011 Oct 28.

Developmental nicotine exposure induced alterations in behavior and glutamate 
receptor function in hippocampus.

Parameshwaran K(1)
 Buabeid MA, Karuppagounder SS, Uthayathas S, Thiruchelvam K, 
Shonesy B, Dityatev A, Escobar MC, Dhanasekaran M, Suppiramaniam V.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacal Sciences, Harrison School of Pharmacy, Auburn 
University, Auburn, AL 36849, USA.
In the developing brain, nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are involved 
in cell survival, targeting, formation of neural and sensory circuits, and 
development and maturation of other neurotransmitter systems.
This regulatory 
role is disrupted when the developing brain is exposed to nicotine, which occurs 
with tobacco use during pregnancy.
Prenatal nicotine exposure has been shown to 
be a strong risk factor for memory deficits and other behavioral aberrations in 
the offspring.
The molecular mechanisms underlying these neurobehavioral 
outcomes are not clearly elucidated.
We used a rodent model to assess 
behavioral, neurophysiological, and neurochemical consequences of prenatal 
nicotine exposure in rat offspring with specific emphasis on the hippocampal 
glutamatergic system.
Pregnant dams were infused with nicotine (6 mg/kg/day) 
subcutaneously from the third day of pregnancy until birth.
Results indicate 
that prenatal nicotine exposure leads to increased anxiety and depressive-like 
effects and impaired spatial memory.
Synaptic plasticity in the form of 
long-term potentiation (LTP), basal synaptic transmission, and AMPA 
receptor-mediated synaptic currents were reduced.
The deficit in synaptic 
plasticity was paralleled by declines in protein levels of vesicular glutamate 
transporter 1 (VGLUT1), synaptophysin, AMPA receptor subunit GluR1, 
phospho(Ser845) GluR1, and postsynaptic density 95 (PSD-95).
These results 
suggest that prenatal nicotine exposure by maternal smoking could result in 
alterations in the glutamatergic system in the hippocampus contributing to the 
abnormal neurobehavioral outcomes.
© Springer Basel AG 2011

DOI: 10.1007/s00018-011-0805-4
PMCID: PMC11114542
PMID: 22033836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Asymmetric spike-timing dependent plasticity of striatal nitric oxide-synthase interneurons 1. Neuroscience. 2009 Jun 2;160(4):744-54. doi:
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.03.015.  Epub 2009 Mar 19.

Asymmetric spike-timing dependent plasticity of striatal nitric oxide-synthase 
interneurons.

Fino E(1)
 Paille V, Deniau JM, Venance L.

Author information:
(1)Dynamics and Pathophysiology of Neural Networks, INSERM U-667, Collège de 
France, Université Pierre et Marie Curie, 11 Place Marcelin Berthelot, Paris 
Cedex 05, France.
Corticostriatal projections constitute the major inputs to basal ganglia, an 
ensemble of sub-cortical nuclei involved in the learning of cognitive-motor 
sequences in response to environmental stimuli.
Besides striatal output neurons 
(medium-sized spiny neurons, MSNs) in charge of the detection of cortical 
activity, three main classes of interneurons (GABAergic, cholinergic and nitric 
oxide (NO)-synthase interneurons) tightly regulate the corticostriatal 
information transfer.
Despite the crucial role of NO on neuronal signaling and 
synaptic plasticity, little is known about corticostriatal synaptic transmission 
and plasticity at the level of striatal neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) 
interneurons.
Using a corticostriatal rat brain slice preserving the connections 
between the somatosensory cortex and the striatal cells, we have explored the 
synaptic transmission between the cerebral cortex and striatal nNOS interneurons 
and their capability to develop activity-dependent long-term plasticity based on 
the quasi-coincident cortical and striatal activities (spike-timing dependent 
plasticity, STDP).
We have observed that cortical pyramidal cells activate 
monosynaptically and very efficiently the striatal nNOS interneurons.
In 
addition, nNOS interneurons are able to develop strong bidirectional long-term 
plasticity, following STDP protocols.
Indeed, the strength of cortically-evoked 
response at nNOS interneurons varied as a function of time interval between pre- 
and postsynaptic activations (Deltat=t(post)-t(pre)).
For Deltat<0, excitatory 
post-synaptic currents (EPSCs) were depressed, peaking at a delay of -25 ms. For 
Deltat>0, EPSCs depressed for 0<Deltat<+30 ms (peaking at +23 ms) and 
potentiated for +30<Deltat<+65 ms (peaking at +42 ms).
The present study reports 
a direct connection between the striatal nNOS interneurons and the cerebral 
cortex, and the existence of long-term synaptic plasticity.
In addition, this 
constitutes the first report of an asymmetric bidirectional STDP, with long-term 
depression (LTD) induced for Deltat<0 and "early" Deltat>0 and long-term 
potentiation (LTP) induced by "late" Deltat>0.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2009.03.015
PMID: 19303912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Interaction between inhibitory and excitatory synaptic potentials at a peripheral neurone. <jats:p>1. The interaction between inhibitory and excitatory synaptic potentials in neurones lying in the submucous plexus of guinea‐pig ileum has been examined. 2. It was found that during an inhibitory conductance change
 electrotonic potentials were more depressed in amplitude than were excitatory synaptic potentials.
3.
It is suggested that inhibitory conductance changes may have only a slight effect on the impedance seen by excitatory synaptic currents as much of the excitatory synaptic current flow is likely to be capacitive.
4.
A part of the depression of excitatory synaptic potential amplitude was not associated with changes in electrical properties of neurones and it is suggested that inhibitory transmitter may reduce the release of excitatory transmitter.</jats:p>
In vivo study on the neurotransmitters and their metabolites change in depressive disorder rat plasma by ultra high performance liquid chromatography coupled to tandem mass spectrometry 1. J Chromatogr B Analyt Technol Biomed Life Sci. 2015 Apr 15;988:59-65. doi: 
10.1016/j.jchromb.2015.02.029. Epub 2015 Feb 27.

In vivo study on the neurotransmitters and their metabolites change in 
depressive disorder rat plasma by ultra high performance liquid chromatography 
coupled to tandem mass spectrometry.

Zhao L(1)
 Zheng S(1), Su G(2), Lu X(1), Yang J(2), Xiong Z(3), Wu C(4).
Author information:
(1)School of Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, 
China.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, 103 Wenhua 
Road, 110016 Shenyang, China.
(3)School of Pharmacy, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, Shenyang 110016, 
China.
Electronic address: bearry200@126.com.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Shenyang Pharmaceutical University, 103 Wenhua 
Road, 110016 Shenyang, China.
Electronic address: chunfuw@gmail.com.
A sensitive and versatile, ultra-high performance, liquid chromatography-tandem 
mass spectrometry (UHPLC-MS/MS) method coupled to pre-column derivatization for 
the simultaneous determination of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), 
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), dopamine (DA), norepinephrine (NE), 
homovanillic acid (HVA), γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA) and glutamic acid (Glu) was 
developed and validated in rat plasma.
The analytes were dansylated under strong 
alkaline conditions after protein precipitation extraction, which were analyzed 
on a BEH C18 column using a gradient elution.
The lower limit of quantification 
(LLOQ) values for 5-HT, 5-HIAA, DA, NE, HVA, GABA and Glu were 1.00, 1.00, 
0.991, 0.992, 1.02, 1000, and 5030 pmol/mL, respectively.
Good linearity was 
obtained (r > 0.99) and the intra- and inter-day precisions of the method 
(relative standard deviation, RSD%) were lower than 12%.
The method was novel, 
sensitive and specific which can provide an alternative method for the 
quantification of neurotransmitters and their metabolites in plasma samples.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jchromb.2015.02.029
PMID: 25746753 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Identification of antidepressant-like ingredients in ginseng root (Panax ginseng C.A. Meyer) using a menopausal depressive-like state in female mice: participation of 5-HT2A receptors 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2011 Aug;216(4):589-99. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-011-2252-1. Epub 2011 Mar 22.

Identification of antidepressant-like ingredients in ginseng root (Panax ginseng 
C.A. Meyer) using a menopausal depressive-like state in female mice: 
participation of 5-HT2A receptors.

Yamada N(1)
 Araki H, Yoshimura H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacy, Ehime University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Toon, Ehime, Japan.
RATIONALE: After reports of adverse effects with hormone replacement therapy, 
such as reproductive and breast cancer and coronary heart disease, much 
attention has been given to the development of new remedies to alleviate 
menopausal depression in women, but methods for their preclinical evaluation 
have not been clarified.
We previously developed a procedure to predict the drug 
effect on the menopausal depressive-like state in female mice.
OBJECTIVES: We attempted to identify psychoactive components from ginseng root, 
one of the earliest known materials for menopausal disorder, and to clarify the 
possible mechanism involved.
METHODS: As an index of a depressive-like state, we used the prolongation of 
immobility time induced by an ovariectomy during the forced swimming test.
Chronic treatment with the candidate substance began the day after ovariectomy 
and continued for 14 days.
To examine whether the 5-HT(2A) receptor antagonist 
ritanserin antagonized the antidepressant-like effect of ginsenoside Rb(1), 
ritanserin was given as pretreatment 15 min before the daily administration of 
ginsenoside Rb(1) and the antagonistic effect was compared with ginsenoside 
Rb(1) alone.
RESULTS: Ginsenoside Rb(1) and compound K were active ingredients that 
dose-dependently prevented the prolongation of immobility time induced by 
ovariectomy.
Co-administration of ritanserin, a 5-HT(2A)-receptor antagonist, 
antagonized the effect of ginsenoside Rb(1).
CONCLUSIONS: We suggest that ginsenoside Rb(1) and its metabolite, compound K, 
are antidepressant-like components of the ginseng root, and that 5-HT(2A) 
receptors may play an important role in mediating the antidepressant-like effect 
of ginsenoside Rb(1).
DOI: 10.1007/s00213-011-2252-1
PMID: 21424694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
PPARγ Agonist Improves Neuronal Insulin Receptor Function in Hippocampus and Brain Mitochondria Function in Rats with Insulin Resistance Induced by Long Term High-Fat Diets <jats:p>We previously demonstrated that a high-fat diet (HFD) consumption can cause not only peripheral insulin resistance
 but also neuronal insulin resistance.
Moreover, the consumption of an HFD has been shown to cause mitochondrial dysfunction in both the skeletal muscle and liver.
Rosiglitazone, a peroxizome proliferator-activated receptor-γ ligand, is a drug used to treat type 2 diabetes mellitus.
Recent studies suggested that rosiglitazone can improve learning and memory in both human and animal models.
However, the effects of rosiglitazone on neuronal insulin resistance and brain mitochondria after the HFD consumption have not yet been investigated.
Therefore, we tested the hypothesis that rosiglitazone improves neuronal insulin resistance caused by a HFD via attenuating the dysfunction of neuronal insulin receptors and brain mitochondria.
Rosiglitazone (5 mg/kg · d) was given for 14 d to rats that were fed with either a HFD or normal diet for 12 wk.
After the 14th week, all animals were euthanized, and their brains were removed and examined for insulin-induced long-term depression, neuronal insulin signaling, and brain mitochondrial function.
We found that rosiglitazone significantly improved peripheral insulin resistance and insulin-induced long-term depression and increased neuronal Akt/PKB-ser phosphorylation in response to insulin.
Furthermore, rosiglitazone prevented brain mitochondrial conformational changes and attenuated brain mitochondrial swelling, brain mitochondrial membrane potential changes, and brain mitochondrial ROS production.
Our data suggest that neuronal insulin resistance and the impairment of brain mitochondria caused by a 12-wk HFD consumption can be reversed by rosiglitazone.</jats:p>
Antidepressant dose of taurine increases mRNA expression of GABAA receptor α2 subunit and BDNF in the hippocampus of diabetic rats 1. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Apr 15;283:11-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.01.018. Epub
2015  Jan 19.

Antidepressant dose of taurine increases mRNA expression of GABAA receptor α2 
subunit and BDNF in the hippocampus of diabetic rats.

Caletti G(1)
 Almeida FB(2), Agnes G(3), Nin MS(4), Barros HM(5), Gomez R(6).
Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós Graduação de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de 
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA, Sarmento Leite, 245, 90050-170, 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
Electronic address: cgreice@hotmail.com.
(2)Departamento de Farmacociências, Laboratório de Neuropsicofarmacologia, 
Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA, Sarmento 
Leite, 245, 90050-170, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(3)Laboratório de Biologia Molecular, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde 
de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA, Sarmento Leite, 245, 90050-170, Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil.
(4)Programa de Pós Graduação de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de 
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA, Sarmento Leite, 245, 90050-170, 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; Disciplina de Bioestatística, Centro Universitário 
Metodista do IPA, Cel.
Joaquim Pedro Salgado, 80, 90420-60, Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil.
(5)Programa de Pós Graduação de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de 
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA, Sarmento Leite, 245, 90050-170, 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; Departamento de Farmacociências, Laboratório de 
Neuropsicofarmacologia, Universidade Federal de Ciências da Saúde de Porto 
Alegre - UFCSPA, Sarmento Leite, 245, 90050-170, Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil.
(6)Programa de Pós Graduação de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de 
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre - UFCSPA, Sarmento Leite, 245, 90050-170, 
Porto Alegre, RS, Brazil; Departamento de Farmacologia, Universidade Federal do 
Rio Grande do Sul - UFRGS, Sarmento Leite, 500, 90050-170, Porto Alegre, RS, 
Brazil.
Diabetes mellitus is a metabolic disorder associated with higher risk for 
depression.
Diabetic rats present depressive-like behaviors and taurine, one of 
the most abundant free amino acids in the brain, reverses this depressive 
behaviors.
Because taurine is a GABAA agonist modulator, we hypothesize that its 
antidepressant effect results from the interaction on this system by changing α2 
GABAA receptor subunit expression, beside changes on BDNF mRNA, and memory in 
diabetic rats.
Streptozotocin-diabetic and non-diabetic Wistar rats were daily 
injected with 100mg/kg of taurine or saline, intraperitoneally, for 30 days.
At 
the end of the experiment, rats were exposed to the novel object recognition 
memory.
Later they were euthanized, the brains were weighed, and the hippocampus 
was dissected for α2 GABAA subunit and BDNF mRNA expression.
Real-time 
quantitative PCR (qPCR) showed that diabetic rats presented lower α2 GABAA 
subunit and BDNF mRNA expression than non-diabetic rats and taurine increased 
both parameters in these sick rats.
Taurine also reversed the lower brain weight 
and improved the short-term memory in diabetic rats.
Thus, the taurine 
antidepressant effect may be explained by interference with the GABA system, in 
line to its neuroprotective effect showed here by preventing brain weight loss 
and improving memory in diabetic rats.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.01.018
PMID: 25612506 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Blockade by 2
2′,2″‐tripyridine of the nicotinic acetylcholine receptor channels in embryonic <i>Xenopus</i> muscle cells <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The effects of 2,2′,2″‐tripyridine on the nicotinic acetylcholine (ACh) receptor channels were studied in the cultured myocytes of 1‐day‐old <jats:italic>Xenopus</jats:italic> embryos.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>2,2′,2″‐Tripyridine depressed the amplitude of iontophoretic ACh‐induced current at a low frequency of 0.7 Hz stimulation and it not only decreased the initial responses but also enhanced the run‐down of ACh‐induced current at higher frequency stimulation of 7 Hz and 30 Hz.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Single ACh channel recordings showed that 2,2′,2″‐tripyridine decreased the channel conductance, the opening frequency and mean open time of both types of low‐ and high‐conductance channels.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>These results suggest that the blocking actions of 2,2′,2″‐tripyridine on ACh receptor channels in the skeletal muscle may contribute to the depression of the nerve‐evoked contraction of the mouse diaphragm as reported previously.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Calcium‐dependent inactivation and depletion of synaptic cleft calcium ions combine to regulate rod calcium currents under physiological conditions <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>L‐type Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> currents (<jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub>) in rod photoreceptors exhibit Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐dependent inactivation. Perforated‐patch whole‐cell recordings were obtained from isolated rods of the tiger salamander using 1.8 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc> Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> in the bathing medium to determine the extent of Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐dependent inactivation of <jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> with physiological [Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>] and endogenous buffering. <jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> was measured with voltage ramps applied before and after 5‐s steps to −40
 −30, −20, or −10 mV.
Long depolarizing steps in isolated rods produced inactivation of <jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> ranging from 15% at −40 mV to &gt; 80% at −10 mV.
Because, in addition to Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐dependent inactivation, depletion of synaptic cleft Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> accompanying activation of <jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> can reduce presynaptic <jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> at calycal synapses, we investigated whether a similar mechanism worked at the invaginating rod synapse.
Rods from retinal slices with intact synapses were compared with isolated rods in which synaptic cleft depletion is absent.
<jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> was more strongly depressed by depolarization of rods in retinal slices, with <jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> reduced by 47% following voltage steps to −40 mV.
The depression of currents by depolarization was also greater for rods from retinal slices than isolated rods when Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> was replaced with Ba<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> to reduce Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐dependent inactivation.
The stronger depolarization‐evoked inhibition of <jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> in retinal slices compared to isolated rods probably reflects depletion of synaptic cleft Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> arising from sustained Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> influx.
Inactivation of <jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> exhibited slow onset and recovery.
These findings suggest that Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐dependent inactivation and depletion of synaptic cleft Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> may combine to regulate <jats:italic>I</jats:italic><jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub> in response to light‐evoked changes in rod membrane potential.</jats:p>
Metabotropic Glutamate Receptors Are Involved in Long-Term Potentiation in Isolated Slices of Rat Medial Frontal Cortex <jats:p> Vickery
 R. M., Shanida H. Morris, and Lynn J. Bindman.
Metabotropic glutamate receptors are involved in long-term potentiation in isolated slices of rat medial frontal cortex.
J. Neurophysiol.
78: 3039–3046, 1997.
The prelimbic region of medial frontal cortex in the rat receives a direct input from the hippocampus and this functional connection is essential for aspects of spatial memory.
Activity-dependent changes in the effectiveness of synaptic transmission in the medial frontal cortex, namely long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) can persist for tens of minutes or hours and may be the basis of learning and memory storage.
Glutamatergic activation of ionotropic receptors is required to induce both LTP and LTD. We now present evidence of the involvement of metabotropic glutamate receptors in LTP in isolated slices of frontal cortex.
Repetitive bursts of stimulation at theta frequencies (TBS) were applied to layer II, and monosynaptic EPSPs were monitored in layer V neurons of the prelimbic area.
TBS was found to be more effective at inducing LTP than tetanic stimulation at 100 Hz and produced LTP that lasted &gt;30 min in 8 out of 14 neurons.
Tetanic stimulation at 100 Hz in the presence of the N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA)-antagonist 2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoate (AP5) was reported to be a reliable method of inducing LTD in prelimbic cortex ( Hirsch and Crépel 1991 ).
However we found that this protocol did not facilitate the induction of LTD.
The role of metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluR) in LTP was assessed by using the selective, broad-spectrum antagonist (R, S)-α-methyl-4- carboxyphenylglycine (MCPG).
This drug significantly reduced the incidence of LTP after TBS to only 1 of 14 neurons ( P &lt; 0.02, χ<jats:sup>2</jats:sup> test).
The pooled responses to TBS in MCPG showed significantly reduced potentiation [( P &lt; 0.02, analysis of variance (ANOVA)].
The broad-spectrum mGluR agonist (1S,3R)-1-aminocyclopentane-1,3-dicarboxylic acid (ACPD) and the selective group I agonist S-3 hydroxyphenylglycine(S-3HPG) both produced membrane depolarization, an increase in number of spikes evoked by depolarizing current pulses, and a reduction in the afterhyperpolarization.
Similar effects were produced by these agonists even when synaptic transmission was blocked by use of the γ-aminobutyric acid-B (GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>) receptor agonist, 200 μM baclofen, which suggests that group I mGluRs are present on layer V neurons.
We conclude that mGluRs participate in the production of LTP in prelimbic cortex, and that this excitatory effect could be mediated by the postsynaptic group I mGluRs.
</jats:p>
ATTACHMENT
 LOSS, AND DEPRESSION<sup>*</sup> <jats:title>SUMMARY</jats:title><jats:p>The influence of 10 days of maternal separation on behavior and physiology was studied in 8 social group living pigtailed macaque (<jats:italic>M.
nemestrina</jats:italic>)monkey infants.
Maternal separation was accompanied by behavioral changes' included slowing of movement, decreases in play, increases in oral behaviors, and assumption of a characteristic slouched posture and sad facial expression.
Physiological changes included decreases in heart rate and body temperature, sleep disturbances that were most pronounced in the Awake and REM sleep systems, and changes in EEG alpha power‐spectra.
Individual variability in the behavioral and physiological response to maternal separation was marked, and showed only a minimal correlation with measures of early behavioral development and the early mother‐infant interaction.
Some physiological changes appeared to lie relatively long lasting.
The data demonstrate that the disruption of an attachment bond may be accompanied by pronounced physiological changes suggestive of d general impairment of autonomic homeostatic regulatory processes.
The findings have important implications for our understanding of the Pathophysiology of grief, and the physiological concomitants of.
separation, loss, and depression in children.</jats:p>
Corticotropin-releasing factor mediates the dysphoria-like state associated with alcohol withdrawal in rats 1. Behav Brain Res. 2010 Jul 11;210(2):288-91. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.02.043.
Epub  2010 Mar 1.

Corticotropin-releasing factor mediates the dysphoria-like state associated with 
alcohol withdrawal in rats.

Bruijnzeel AW(1)
 Small E, Pasek TM, Yamada H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, McKnight Brain Institute, University of Florida, 
Gainesville, FL 32610, USA.
awbruijn@ufl.edu

This study investigated the role of CRF in the dysphoria-like state associated 
with alcohol withdrawal in rats.
The intracranial self-stimulation procedure was 
used to assess brain reward thresholds.
Cessation of chronic alcohol 
administration led to an elevation in brain reward thresholds in the alcohol 
dependent rats.
The CRF receptor antagonist D-Phe CRF((12-41)) dose-dependently 
prevented the elevations in brain reward thresholds associated with alcohol 
withdrawal.
This indicates that the dysphoria associated with alcohol withdrawal 
is at least partly mediated by the activation of central CRF receptors.
Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.02.043
PMCID: PMC3319063
PMID: 20193713 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A comparison of the potencies of a series of barbiturates at the neuromuscular junction and on the central nervous system. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1975 Nov;195(2):251-6.

A comparison of the potencies of a series of barbiturates at the neuromuscular 
junction and on the central nervous system.

Lee-Son S
 Waud BE, Waud DR.
The ability of a series of barbiturates to depress the depolarizing action of 
carbachol at the end-plate of guinea-pig lumbrical muscle was studied.
The 
compounds studied were: amorbarbital, aprobarbital, barbital, barbituric acid, 
butabarbital, butalbital, dimethylbutylethyl barbituric acid, hexobarbital, 
mephobarbitak, secobarbital, thiamylal, and thiopental.
The depressant activity 
was sensitive to small changes in structure of the compounds strongly suggesting 
that a specific receptor site was involved in the interaction of the drug with 
the tissue.
The observed relative potencies on the motor end-plate were compared 
with their anesthetic potencies assayed on tadpoles.
The two potencies went 
hand-in-hand for all the compounds studied, including the convulsant member of 
the series.
PMID: 1185595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
N-Desalkylquetiapine
 a Potent Norepinephrine Reuptake Inhibitor and Partial 5-HT1A Agonist, as a Putative Mediator of Quetiapine's Antidepressant Activity 1.
Neuropsychopharmacology.
2008 Sep;33(10):2303-12. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301646.
Epub 2007 Dec 5.
N-desalkylquetiapine, a potent norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor and partial 
5-HT1A agonist, as a putative mediator of quetiapine's antidepressant activity.
Jensen NH(1), Rodriguiz RM, Caron MG, Wetsel WC, Rothman RB, Roth BL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of North Carolina Medical School, 
Chapel Hill, NC 27599, USA.
Quetiapine is an atypical antipsychotic drug that is also US FDA approved for 
treating bipolar depression, albeit by an unknown mechanism.
To discover the 
potential mechanism for this apparently unique action, we screened quetiapine, 
its metabolite N-Desalkylquetiapine, and 
dibenzo[b,f][1,4]thiazepine-11(10-H)-one (DBTO) against a large panel of 
G-protein-coupled receptors, ion channels, and neurotransmitter transporters.
DBTO was inactive at all tested molecular targets.
N-Desalkylquetiapine had a 
high affinity (3.4 nM) for the histamine H(1) receptor and moderate affinities 
(10-100 nM) for the norepinephrine reuptake transporter (NET), the serotonin 
5-HT(1A), 5-HT(1E), 5-HT(2A), 5-HT(2B), 5-HT(7) receptors, the 
alpha(1B)-adrenergic receptor, and the M(1), M(3), and M(5) muscarinic 
receptors.
The compound had low affinities (100-1000 nM) for the 5-HT(1D), 
5-HT(2C), 5-HT(3), 5-HT(5), 5-HT(6), alpha(1A), alpha(2A), alpha(2B), alpha(2C), 
H(2), M(2), M(4), and dopamine D(1), D(2), D(3), and D(4) receptors.
N-Desalkylquetiapine potently inhibited human NE transporter with a K(i) of 12 
nM, about 100-fold more potent than quetiapine itself.
N-Desalkylquetiapine was 
also 10-fold more potent and more efficacious than quetiapine at the 5-HT(1A) 
receptor.
N-Desalkylquetiapine was an antagonist at 5-HT(2A), 5-HT(2B), 
5-HT(2C), alpha(1A), alpha(1D), alpha(2A), alpha(2C), H(1), M(1), M(3), and M(5) 
receptors.
In the mouse tail suspension test, N-Desalkylquetiapine displayed 
potent antidepressant-like activity in VMAT2 heterozygous mice at doses as low 
as 0.1 mg/kg.
These data strongly suggest that the antidepressant activity of 
quetiapine is mediated, at least in part, by its metabolite N-Desalkylquetiapine 
through NET inhibition and partial 5-HT(1A) agonism.
Possible contributions of 
this metabolite to the side effects of quetiapine are discussed.
DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301646
PMID: 18059438 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Asynchronous depression of responses to T- and B-cell mitogens during acute infection with cytomegalovirus in the guinea pig 1. Cell Immunol. 1984 Sep;87(2):727-33. doi: 10.1016/0008-8749(84)90043-1.

Asynchronous depression of responses to T- and B-cell mitogens during acute 
infection with cytomegalovirus in the guinea pig.

Griffith BP
 Lavallee JT, Booss J, Hsiung GD.
The nonspecific functional capacity of spleen cells, taken from female guinea 
pigs with primary acute cytomegalovirus (CMV) infection, was assessed using 
lipopolysaccharide (LPS), a B-cell mitogen, and concanavalin A (Con A), a T-cell 
mitogen.
Proliferative responses to the two mitogens were found to be 
significantly depressed in animals inoculated with CMV as compared to control 
animals.
The defect in Con A responsiveness occurred earlier during the course 
of the infection than the defect in LPS responses.
Although responses to the 
mitogens were depressed at the time of peak virus activity in the spleen, the 
possibility of lytic destruction of the spleen cells by the virus during in 
vitro culture was excluded.
In addition, the depression in Con A responsiveness 
was noted with a wide range of Con A concentrations, and preculture studies 
failed to result in enhanced reactivity of the cells from infected animals.
We 
conclude that reductions of both B- and T-cell functions, which differ in their 
timing during the course of acute CMV infection, occur concurrently with an 
enhanced viral specific immune response in guinea pigs acutely infected with 
CMV.
DOI: 10.1016/0008-8749(84)90043-1
PMID: 6088091 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of the calcium antagonistic compound nifedipine alone and combined with nitrites on the mechanical performance and the relaxation of hypoxic and reoxygenated myocardium 1. Eur Heart J. 1980 Dec;1(Suppl B):23-30. doi: 10.1093/eurheartj/1.suppl_2.23.

Effects of the calcium antagonistic compound nifedipine alone and combined with 
nitrites on the mechanical performance and the relaxation of hypoxic and 
reoxygenated myocardium.

Bonoron-Adele S
 Besse P, Tariosse L, Bricaud H.

DOI: 10.1093/eurheartj/1.suppl_2.23
PMID: 6814914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of [3H]-naloxone binding by opiate agonists [proceedings]. 1. Br J Pharmacol. 1977 Mar;59(3):478P.

Inhibition of [3H]-naloxone binding by opiate agonists [proceedings].

Kosterlitz HW
 Leslie FM.
PMCID: PMC1668013
PMID: 843716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Toluene has antidepressant-like actions in two animal models used for the screening of antidepressant drugs 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2009 Jun;204(2):279-86. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-009-1462-2. Epub 2009 Jan 17.

Toluene has antidepressant-like actions in two animal models used for the 
screening of antidepressant drugs.

Cruz SL(1)
 Soberanes-Chávez P, Páez-Martinez N, López-Rubalcava C.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Farmacobiologia, Cinvestav, Sede Sur, Calzada de Tenorios 
235, Col. Granjas Coapa, Mexico City C.P.
14330, Mexico.
RATIONALE: Many abused solvents share a profile of effects with classical 
antidepressants.
For example, toluene, which is a representative and widely 
abused solvent, has been reported to increase both serotonin and noradrenaline 
levels in several brain areas after an acute exposure and to act as a 
noncompetitive antagonist of the glutamatergic N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) 
receptor subtype.
Therefore, it is possible that toluene could possess 
antidepressant-like actions.
OBJECTIVE: To provide an initial screening of toluene's antidepressant-like 
actions in the forced swimming test (FST) and the tail suspension test (TST) in 
mice and to analyze its possible mechanism of action.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Two series of experiments were performed.
In the first 
one, male animals were exposed to toluene (0, 500, 1,000, 2,000, or 4,000 ppm) 
in a static exposure chamber for 30 min, and immediately after, evaluated for 
antidepressant-like effects.
The results were compared with those obtained from 
mice treated with the serotonergic antidepressant clomipramine (CMI), the 
noradrenergic antidepressant desipramine (DMI), and the glutamatergic 
antidepressants, ketamine and MK-801.
In the second part, we analyzed the effect 
of a combined administration of a subeffective concentration of toluene with a 
suboptimal dose of the various antidepressants acting at different 
neurotransmitter systems.
RESULTS: Toluene produced a concentration-dependent antidepressant-like action 
in the FST and TST and facilitated both MK-801 and ketamine antidepressant-like 
effects, but not those of DMI or CMI.
CONCLUSIONS: Toluene has antidepressant-like effects that are synergized with 
NMDA receptor antagonists.
DOI: 10.1007/s00213-009-1462-2
PMID: 19151967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Axonal Sprouts and [
            <sup>3</sup>
            H]Norepinephrine Uptake by Superior Cervical Ganglia in Organ Culture <jats:p>
            Superior cervical ganglia from adult rats maintained in organ culture show a progressive increase in the rate of uptake of [
            <jats:sup>3</jats:sup>
            H]norepinephrine. The enhanced uptake of norepinephrine is a consequence of the development of axonal sprouts. Formation of axonal sprouts
 which appear to have many of the properties of sympathetic nerve endings, is inhibited by colchicine and vinblastine, presumably because of the interaction of these drugs with neurotubular protein.
</jats:p>
Effect of Ergocornine on Transplanted Mammary Tumor Growth and Pituitary Prolactin Level in BALB/c Mice&lt;xref ref-type="fn" rid="FN2"&gt;2&lt;/xref&gt; 1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1972 Jun;48(6):1727-31.

Effect of ergocornine on transplanted mammary tumor growth and pituitary 
prolactin level in BALB/c mice.

Singh DV
 Meites J, Halmi L, Kortright KH, Brennan MJ.
PMID: 5056256 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Neuropharmacological effect of novel 5-HT3 receptor antagonist
 N-n-propyl-3-ethoxyquinoxaline-2-carboxamide (6n) on chronic unpredictable mild stress-induced molecular and cellular response: Behavioural and biochemical evidences 1.
Pharmacol Rep. 2014 Oct;66(5):804-10. doi: 10.1016/j.pharep.2014.05.002.
Epub 
2014 May 22.
Neuropharmacological effect of novel 5-HT3 receptor antagonist, 
N-n-propyl-3-ethoxyquinoxaline-2-carboxamide (6n) on chronic unpredictable mild 
stress-induced molecular and cellular response: Behavioural and biochemical 
evidences.
Bhatt S(1), Mahesh R(2), Jindal A(2), Devadoss T(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Pilani, 
India.
Electronic address: shvetankbhatt@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of Technology & Science, Pilani, 
India.
BACKGROUND: Chronic unpredictable stressors can produce a situation similar to 
human depression and such animal models can be used for the preclinical 
evaluation of antidepressants.
The 5-HT3 receptor antagonists modulate 
serotonergic pathways and show antidepressant-like effect in various animal 
models of depression.
METHODS: In this study, a novel and potential 5-HT3 receptor antagonist 
N-n-propyl-3-ethoxyquinoxaline-2-carboxamide (6n) with good Log P (2.52) value 
and pA2 (7.6) values, synthesized in our laboratory was explore to study the 
effects on CUMS-induced behavioural and biochemical alterations in mice.
Mice 
were subjected to different stress paradigms daily for a period of 28 days to 
induce depressive-like behaviour.
RESULTS: CUMS caused depression-like behaviour in mice, as indicated by the 
significant decrease in sucrose consumption and increase in immobility time in 
the forced swim test (FST) while there was no significant effect on spontaneous 
locomotor activity (SLA) observed.
In addition it was found that lipid peroxide 
and nitrite levels were significantly increased, whereas glutathione (GSH), 
superoxide dismutase (SOD) and catalase (CAT) levels were decreased in brain 
tissue of CUMS-treated mice.
Compound 6n (1 and 2mg/kg, po, 21 days) and 
fluoxetine treatment (20mg/kg, po, 21 days) significantly altered the 
CUMS-induced behavioural (increased immobility period, reduced sucrose 
preference) and biochemical (increased lipid peroxidation, increased brain 
nitrite; decreased GSH, SOD and CAT levels) parameters while there was no 
significant effect of observed on SLA.
CONCLUSION: Compound 6n produced antidepressant-like effects in behavioural 
despair paradigm in chronically stressed mice by restoring antioxidant enzyme 
activity up to significant level.
Copyright © 2014 Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences.
Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp.
z o.o.
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pharep.2014.05.002
PMID: 25149984 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Importance of physico‐chemical properties in determining the kinetics of the effects of Class I antiarrhythmic drugs on maximum rate of depolarization in guinea‐pig ventricle <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The effects of Class I antiarrhythmic drugs on the maximum rate of depolarization <jats:inline-graphic xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xlink:href="graphic/j.1476-5381.1983.tb11046.x.fu1.gif" xlink:title="inline image" /> of guinea‐pig ventricular action potentials were studied by standard microelectrode techniques.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The ability of seven different drugs to depress <jats:inline-graphic xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xlink:href="graphic/j.1476-5381.1983.tb11046.x.fu2.gif" xlink:title="inline image" /> in unstimulated tissue (‘resting block’) was found to correlate poorly with the lipophilicity (log P) of the compounds and only a little better with their molecular weights.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Depression of <jats:inline-graphic xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xlink:href="graphic/j.1476-5381.1983.tb11046.x.fu3.gif" xlink:title="inline image" /> in stimulated tissue was studied for 11 drugs and found
 in all cases, to increase with stimulation frequency (‘rate‐dependent block’).</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The rapidity of onset of rate‐dependent block (at approximately equipotent concentrations) varied markedly between drugs.
It correlated well with molecular weight (<jats:italic>r</jats:italic> = 0.83; <jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.01).</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The time constant of recovery from rate‐dependent block (ire) also correlated very well with molecular weight (<jats:italic>r</jats:italic> = 0.94; <jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.001) for the seven drugs thus studied.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>A simplified model for the interaction of Class I drugs with the fast sodium channel is proposed in which the drugs all act as ‘inactivation enhancers’; (as suggested by other workers) but in which their molecular weight plays a central role in determining the kinetics of this interaction.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Effect of ethanol on placenta & liver of mice. 1. Indian J Exp Biol. 1977 Apr;15(4):274-6.

Effect of ethanol on placenta & liver of mice.

Tarachand U
 Eapen J.

PMID: 562316 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Triiodothyronine on the Metabolism of Collagen in Cultured Embryonic Bones* 1. Endocrinology. 1972 Jun;90(6):1476-82. doi: 10.1210/endo-90-6-1476.

Effect of triiodothyronine in the metabolism of collagen in cultured embryonic 
bones.

Halme J
 Uitto J, Kivirikko KI, Saxén L.

DOI: 10.1210/endo-90-6-1476
PMID: 4336436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Respiratory peripheral chemosensory irritation
 acute and repeated exposure toxicity studies with aerosols of triethylene glycol <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The potential for adverse effects from exposure to respirable aerosols of triethylene glycol (TEG: CAS Number 112‐27‐6) was investigated by a peripheral chemosensory irritation study, and by acute and repeated exposure toxicity studies.
The sensory irritation study, conducted with male Swiss Webster mice, showed an exposure concentration‐related depression of breathing rate that allowed the calculation of an RD<jats:sub>50</jats:sub> of 5140 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup>.
In an acute study male and female Sprague Dawley rats were exposed whole body to aerosols of TEG up to 6730 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> for 4 h. No mortalities occurred at this high concentration, but unexplained mortality occurred in female rats at 5230 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> at 2–3 days postexposure.
Two repeats of the 5230 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> exposure did not cause mortality.
Signs at 6730 and 5230 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> were limited to those of irritancy.
For a 9 day repeated exposure study rats were exposed whole body to 0, 494, 2011 and 4824 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> TEG aerosols for 6 h day<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>.
Mortalities occurred at 4824 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> between exposure days 2 and 5.
Nonspecific indications of toxicity at 2011 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> were signs of irritation, decreased body weight and increased food and water consumption; evidence of hepatic dysfunction was indicated by increased serum alkaline phosphatase and alanine aminotransferase activities, but liver histology was normal.
Fluid imbalance was suggested by increases in water consumption, blood urea nitrogen, relative kidney weight and urine volume, with decreased urine osmolality, pH and <jats:italic>N</jats:italic>‐acetyl‐<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>‐<jats:sc>D</jats:sc>‐glucosaminidase activity.
At 494 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> there were minimal signs of irritation, increased water consumption and slightly increased alkaline phosphatase; histology of the kidney was normal.
Thus, in this 9 day repeated aerosol whole body exposure study a No‐Observed‐Effect‐Level (NOEL) could not be established.
Since preening of the fur at these high aerosol concentrations exposures might have led to a confounding factor from the resultant oral intake, another 9 day repeated aerosol study was conducted, but by nose‐only exposure of rats for 6 h day<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> to TEG aerosol concentrations of 0, 102, 517 and 1036 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup>.
In this study there were no clinical signs, no effects on food and water consumption, and no biochemical or histological evidence of hepatorenal dysfunction.
By the end of the exposure period, male and female rats of the 1036 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> group had body weights lower than those of the controls, but not with statistical significance.
Since there were no statistically significant effects on any monitors, 1036 mg m<jats:sup>−3</jats:sup> is considered to be a threshold for toxicity by nose‐only exposure to TEG aerosol.
The findings indicate that exposure to a respirable aerosol is not acutely harmful, but may cause sensory irritant effects.
Repeated exposure to high concentrations of TEG aerosols may be harmful, particularly if there are contributions from additional routes of exposure.
Copyright © 2006 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.</jats:p>
Suppressive effect of acetylsalicylic acid on erythropoietin-responsive cells in mice. 1. Acta Physiol Pharmacol Latinoam. 1984;34(3):229-34.

Suppressive effect of acetylsalicylic acid on erythropoietin-responsive cells in 
mice.

Giglio MJ
 Santoro RC, Bozzini CE.
The time-response curve for RBC-59Fe uptake following i.p.
injections of 3 doses 
of 5 mg of acetylsalicylic acid (ASA) at 4 hour interval into normal, 
nonpolycythemic mice, shows a maximal depression (35% of normal) at 3 days after 
ASA with return to almost normal values by 7 days.
The effect is dose-related, 
showing a plateau with doses of ASA above 5 mg/4 hr.
The shape of the 
time-response curve indicates that the more mature cells in the erythron are not 
affected by ASA and that the major effect of the drug must be on earlier 
erythroid cells.
Administration of ASA prior to administration of erythropoietin 
(Epo) into post-hypoxic polycythemic mice depresses the incorporation of 59Fe 
into erythrocytes.
The depression of radioiron uptake is similar when ASA is 
given prior to or simultaneously with Epo.
When ASA is given 24 hr after 
injection of Epo, suppression is less marked.
These results suggest a 
suppressive effect of the drug on the erythropoietin-responsive cells (ERC).
PMID: 6241781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Activity-dependent depression of nerve action potential by phenytoin 1. Neurosci Lett. 1986 May 15;66(2):163-8. doi: 10.1016/0304-3940(86)90184-9.

Activity-dependent depression of nerve action potential by phenytoin.

David G
 Selzer ME, Yaari Y.
The action of the anticonvulsant drug phenytoin was investigated on the 
responsiveness of isolated amphibian and human nerves to repetitive stimulation.
At low frequencies of stimulation (0.5-25 Hz) the drug (at a concentration of 
0.1 mM) had no notable effect on the compound nerve action potential.
By 
contrast, at higher rates of stimulation (50-300 Hz), it produced a progressive 
decrease in amplitude and integral of the compound action potential.
This effect 
was positively correlated with the frequency of nerve activation and was 
markedly enhanced by elevating the extracellular K+ concentration.
Thus, 
phenytoin induces a use- and frequency-dependent depression of axon conduction, 
which may contribute to its preferential suppression of the spread of 
high-frequency seizure discharge in the brain.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3940(86)90184-9
PMID: 3725182 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Rapid component IKr of the guinea-pig cardiac delayed rectifier K+ current is inhibited by β1-adrenoreceptor activation
 via cAMP/protein kinase A-dependent pathways 1.
Cardiovasc Res.
2002 Feb 1;53(2):355-62. doi: 10.1016/s0008-6363(01)00509-0.
Rapid component I(Kr) of the guinea-pig cardiac delayed rectifier K(+) current 
is inhibited by beta(1)-adrenoreceptor activation, via cAMP/protein kinase 
A-dependent pathways.
Karle CA(1), Zitron E, Zhang W, Kathöfer S, Schoels W, Kiehn J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiology, University of Heidelberg Medical School, 
Bergheimerstrasse 58, D-69115 Heidelberg, Germany.
OBJECTIVE: The antiarrhythmic potential of betablockers contributes to their 
beneficial effects in the treatment of cardiac diseases, although the molecular 
basis of their class II antiarrhythmic action has not been clarified yet.
METHODS: To investigate a putative functional link between beta-adrenoreceptors 
and the fast component of cardiac delayed rectifier K(+) channels (I(Kr)), 
whole-cell patch-clamp experiments were performed with isolated guinea-pig 
ventricular myocytes.
Tail currents of I(Kr) were measured at -40 mV after short 
(200 ms) test pulses to +40 mV.
RESULTS: After application of the unspecific beta-receptor agonist isoproterenol 
(10 microM) for 12 min, the I(Kr) tail current was decreased by 72%, with an 
IC(50) of 1.4 microM.
The specific beta(1)-blocker CGP207120A (10 microM) 
significantly attenuated the isoproterenol effect (net 24% decrease).
The 
specific beta(1)-agonist xamoterol (10 microM), could mimic the isoproterenol 
effect (58% decrease).
Modulators of beta(2)- or beta(3)-adrenoreceptors were 
far less effective.
When isoproterenol or xamoterol were combined with KT5720 
(2.5 microM), a specific inhibitor of protein kinase A (PKA), their effects were 
drastically reduced, indicating that PKA presumably mediates the 
beta(1)-adrenergic inhibition of I(Kr).
Tail current reductions by cAMP, 
forskolin, PKA catalytic subunit and a combination of PKA holoenzyme and cAMP 
support an involvement of PKA in the regulation of I(Kr).
CONCLUSIONS: The functional link between I(Kr) and the beta(1)-adrenergic 
receptor involving PKA may play an important role in arrhythmogenesis and 
contribute to the antiarrhythmic action of clinically used beta(1)-blockers.
DOI: 10.1016/s0008-6363(01)00509-0
PMID: 11827686 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Minimal stimulus parameters and the effects of hyperpolarization on the induction of long-term potentiation in the cat motor cortex 1. Exp Brain Res. 1991;87(2):295-302. doi: 10.1007/BF00231846.

Minimal stimulus parameters and the effects of hyperpolarization on the 
induction of long-term potentiation in the cat motor cortex.

Keller A(1)
 Miyashita E, Asanuma H.

Author information:
(1)Rockefeller University, New York, NY 10021.
The aim of the research program of which the present work is a part is to 
understand the neural mechanisms involved in motor learning and memory.
One of 
the mechanisms postulated to be involved in this process is the induction of 
long-term potentiation (LTP) in the motor cortex.
LTP can be induced in motor 
cortical neurons by tetanic stimulation of their afferents from the 
somatosensory cortex.
In the present study, the effects of different stimulating 
parameters on the induction of LTP were examined, using in-vivo, intracellular 
recordings from anesthetized cats.
The expression of LTP was documented by 
measuring the amplitude and rise-time of excitatory postsynaptic potentials 
(EPSPs) before and after tetanic stimulation.
The minimal tetanic stimulation 
capable of systematically inducing LTP was found to consist of a train of 
stimuli at 50 Hz, 5 s. Shorter trains of stimulation produced only a 
short-lasting, transient potentiation.
In different cells, identical stimulation 
parameters resulted in different degrees of potentiation of synaptic responses.
Following all the stimulation trains examined, EPSP amplitudes were transiently 
depressed before reaching potentiated levels.
The duration of this depression 
was directly correlated with the duration and the frequency of the tetanic 
stimulation.
In all the cells in which LTP was induced, the variability in the 
amplitudes of potentiated EPSP was significantly greater than that of control 
EPSP amplitudes.
Hyperpolarization of the postsynaptic cell, during the delivery 
of the tetanic stimulation, inhibited the induction of LTP.
These phenomena are 
discussed in relation to the postulated mechanisms of LTP induction in the 
cortex.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00231846
PMID: 1769383 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Osmotic Edema Rapidly Increases Neuronal Excitability Through Activation of NMDA Receptor-Dependent Slow Inward Currents in Juvenile and Adult Hippocampus 1. ASN Neuro. 2015 Oct 21;7(5):1759091415605115. doi: 10.1177/1759091415605115. 
Print 2015 Sep-Oct.

Osmotic Edema Rapidly Increases Neuronal Excitability Through Activation of NMDA 
Receptor-Dependent Slow Inward Currents in Juvenile and Adult Hippocampus.

Lauderdale K(1)
 Murphy T(1), Tung T(2), Davila D(2), Binder DK(3), Fiacco 
TA(4).
Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Riverside, CA, USA Center for 
Glial-Neuronal Interactions, University of California Riverside, CA, USA.
(2)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Riverside, CA, USA.
(3)Center for Glial-Neuronal Interactions, University of California Riverside, 
CA, USA Division of Biomedical Sciences, UC Riverside School of Medicine, CA, 
USA.
(4)Department of Cell Biology and Neuroscience, Riverside, CA, USA Center for 
Glial-Neuronal Interactions, University of California Riverside, CA, USA 
toddf@ucr.edu.
Cellular edema (cell swelling) is a principal component of numerous brain 
disorders including ischemia, cortical spreading depression, hyponatremia, and 
epilepsy.
Cellular edema increases seizure-like activity in vitro and in vivo, 
largely through nonsynaptic mechanisms attributable to reduction of the 
extracellular space.
However, the types of excitability changes occurring in 
individual neurons during the acute phase of cell volume increase remain 
unclear.
Using whole-cell patch clamp techniques, we report that one of the 
first effects of osmotic edema on excitability of CA1 pyramidal cells is the 
generation of slow inward currents (SICs), which initiate after approximately 
1 min.
Frequency of SICs increased as osmolarity decreased in a dose-dependent 
manner.
Imaging of real-time volume changes in astrocytes revealed that neuronal 
SICs occurred while astrocytes were still in the process of swelling.
SICs 
evoked by cell swelling were mainly nonsynaptic in origin and NMDA 
receptor-dependent.
To better understand the relationship between SICs and 
changes in neuronal excitability, recordings were performed in increasingly 
physiological conditions.
In the absence of any added pharmacological reagents 
or imposed voltage clamp, osmotic edema induced excitatory postsynaptic 
potentials and burst firing over the same timecourse as SICs.
Like SICs, action 
potentials were blocked by NMDAR antagonists.
Effects were more pronounced in 
adult (8-20 weeks old) compared with juvenile (P15-P21) mice.
Together, our 
results indicate that cell swelling triggered by reduced osmolarity rapidly 
increases neuronal excitability through activation of NMDA receptors.
Our 
findings have important implications for understanding nonsynaptic mechanisms of 
epilepsy in relation to cell swelling and reduction of the extracellular space.
© The Author(s) 2015.
DOI: 10.1177/1759091415605115
PMCID: PMC4623564
PMID: 26489684 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of long-chain fatty acid activation by α-bromopalmitate and phytanate 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1971 Nov 5;248(2):156-66. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2760(71)90002-6.

Inhibition of long-chain fatty acid activation by -bromopalmitate and phytanate.

Pande SV
 Siddiqui AW, Gattereau A.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2760(71)90002-6
PMID: 5130448 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hydroxyethyl Starch Pretreatment in Bacteremic Sheep 1. J Trauma. 1990 Oct;30(10):1246-51. doi: 10.1097/00005373-199010000-00009.

Hydroxyethyl starch pretreatment in bacteremic sheep.

Lübbesmeyer HJ(1)
 Dehring DJ, Theissen JL, Fleming D, Traber L, Herndon DN, 
Traber DL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Texas Medical Branch 77550.
Live bacteria were infused in a chronic ovine lung lymph model to determine if a 
preceding infusion of the colloid, hydroxyethyl starch (HES), exaggerated the 
cardiopulmonary dysfunction or impaired removal of bacteria by macrophages in 
the pulmonary circulation.
HES was infused (3 mL/kg/hr; n = 6) from 24 to 12 hr 
before the bacteria and decreased plasma protein content and increased pulmonary 
lymph to plasma protein concentration because of its oncotic properties.
Ringer's lactate (2 mL/kg/hr) was given after stopping HES and also to the 
control group (n = 6).
Infusion of live Ps.
aeruginosa (2.5 x 10(8) Ps./min for 
approximately 30 min) induced equivalent pulmonary hypertension, increased 
pulmonary microvascular permeability, and cardiovascular depression in the two 
groups.
The removal of bacteria in the lungs was not affected, indicating that 
this measurement of the function of the mononuclear phagocytic system was not 
impaired by the preceding HES.
DOI: 10.1097/00005373-199010000-00009
PMID: 1698991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Kinase Networks Integrate Profiles of N-Methyl-d-aspartate Receptor-mediated Gene Expression in Hippocampus 1. J Biol Chem. 2008 Dec 5;283(49):34101-7. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M804951200. Epub
2008  Sep 23.

Kinase networks integrate profiles of N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor-mediated 
gene expression in hippocampus.

Coba MP(1)
 Valor LM, Kopanitsa MV, Afinowi NO, Grant SG.
Author information:
(1)Genes to Cognition, Wellcome Trust Sanger Institute, Hinxton, Cambridge CB10 
1SA, United Kingdom.
The postsynaptic N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor activates multiple kinases 
and changes the phosphorylation of many postsynaptic proteins organized in 
signaling networks.
Because the NMDA receptor is known to regulate gene 
expression, it is important to examine whether networks of kinases control 
signaling to gene expression.
We examined the requirement of multiple kinases 
and NMDA receptor-interacting proteins for gene expression in mouse hippocampal 
slices.
Protocols that induce long-term depression (LTD) and long-term 
potentiation (LTP) activated common kinases and overlapping gene expression 
profiles.
Combinations of kinases were required for induction of each gene.
Distinct combinations of kinases were required to up-regulate Arc, Npas4, Egr2, 
and Egr4 following either LTP or LTD protocols.
Consistent with the 
combinatorial data, a mouse mutant model of the human cognition disease gene 
SAP102, which couples ERK kinase to the NMDA receptor, showed deregulated 
expression of specific genes.
These data support a network model of postsynaptic 
integration where kinase signaling networks are recruited by differential 
synaptic activity and control both local synaptic events and activity-dependent 
gene expression.
DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M804951200
PMCID: PMC2662229
PMID: 18815127 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
ETHANOL-INDUCED INHIBITION OF TESTOSTERONE BIOSYNTHESIS &lt;italic&gt;IN VITRO&lt;/italic&gt; : LACK OF ACETALDEHYDE EFFECT 1. Alcohol Alcohol. 1987;22(1):17-22.

Ethanol-induced inhibition of testosterone biosynthesis in vitro: lack of 
acetaldehyde effect.

Widenius TV.

Acute ethanol intake has been shown to decrease plasma testosterone levels in 
rodents and man. This is mainly due to inhibition of testosterone synthesis
 but 
there is still some controversy about the mechanisms responsible for the 
inhibition.
These mechanisms were studied in the present experiments with 
isolated rat Leydig cells.
Leydig cells were incubated for two hours in sealed 
plastic vials with various concentrations of ethanol (0.3-40 mM) or acetaldehyde 
(5-40 microM).
Very low ethanol concentrations (2.5 mM) reduced testosterone 
production significantly, whereas even 40 microM acetaldehyde added repeatedly 
to the incubation medium had no effect on testosterone levels.
An inhibitor of 
alcohol dehydrogenase, 4-methylpyrazole, abolished the ethanol-induced 
inhibition of testosterone synthesis.
A suggested mechanism for the inhibition 
is an elevated free [NADH]/[NAD+] ratio in Leydig cells caused by the metabolism 
of ethanol.
PMID: 3593480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of combined use of rehmannia and rhodiola on hemopoietic function in mice with bone marrow depression]. 1. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2010 Nov;30(11):1190-2.

[Effect of combined use of rehmannia and rhodiola on hemopoietic function in 
mice with bone marrow depression].

[Article in Chinese]

Luo J(1)
 Li X, Lin Z.
Author information:
(1)Changchun University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Changchun.
jingluo304@yahoo.com.cn

OBJECTIVE To explore the effect of combined use of rehmannia (RM) and rhodiola 
(RD) on peripheral leukopenia and bone marrow hematopoietic function suppression 
induced by cyclophosphamide (CTX) in mice.
METHODS: ICR mice were established into bone marrow inhibition models by 
intraperitoneal injection of CTX, and were administered with RM, RD or its 
extract (RDE), singly or in mixture, via gastrogavage for 10 days.
The changes 
of peripheral hemogram, bone marrow nucleated cell proliferation, CFU-GM colony 
formation, GM-CSF and erythropoietin (EPO) secretion were observed.
RESULTS: Compared with the un-treated model mice, the peripheral white blood 
cell count was significantly higher in model mice treated with RDE and RM 
mixture; the bone marrow nucleated cells count, CFU-GM formation, and GM-CSF 
production were significant higher in model mice treated with RD and RM mixture, 
showing statistical significance (P < 0.01); while EPO production in the RD and 
RM mixture treated group was slightly elevated, but the difference showed no 
statistical significance.
CONCLUSION: RD and RM mixture could regulate hematopoietic system by promoting 
the production of bone marrow cells and colonies, as well as enhancing the 
synthesis of related cytokines, such as GM-CSF, so as to increase the amount of 
peripheral white blood cells and restore the hematopoietic function of organism.
PMID: 21275174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
GENETIC ARCHITECTURE OF DIFFERENCES BETWEEN POPULATIONS OF COWPEA WEEVIL (CALLOSOBRUCHUS MACULATUS) EVOLVED IN THE SAME ENVIRONMENT 1. Evolution. 2003 Feb;57(2):274-87. doi: 10.1111/j.0014-3820.2003.tb00262.x.

Genetic architecture of differences between populations of cowpea weevil 
(Callosobruchus maculatus) evolved in the same environment.

Bieri J(1)
 Kawecki TJ.
Author information:
(1)Zoology Institute, University of Basel, Rheinsprung 9, CH-4051 Basel, 
Switzerland.
jonas.bieri@gmx.net

We investigated the genetic architecture underlying differentiation in 
fitness-related traits between two pairs of populations of the seed beetle 
Callosobruchus maculatus (Coleoptera: Bruchidae).
These populations had 
geographically distant (> 2000 km) origins but evolved in a uniform laboratory 
environment for 120 generations.
For each pair of populations (Nigeria x Yemen 
and Cameroon x Uganda) we estimated the means of five fitness-related characters 
and a measure of fitness (net reproductive rate R0) in each of the parental 
populations and 12 types of hybrids (two F1 and two F2 lines and eight 
backcrosses).
Models containing up to nine composite genetic parameters were 
fitted to the means of the 14 lines.
The patterns of line means for all traits 
in the Nigeria x Yemen cross and for four traits (larval survival, developmental 
rate, female body weight, and fecundity) in the Cameroon x Uganda cross were 
best explained by models including additive, dominance, and maternal effects, 
but excluding epistasis.
We did not find any evidence for outbreeding depression 
for any trait.
An epistatic component of divergence was detected for egg 
hatching success and R0 in the Cameroon x Uganda cross, but its sign was 
opposite to that expected under outbreeding depression, that is, additive x 
additive epistasis had a positive effect on the performance of F2 hybrids.
All 
traits except fecundity showed a pattern of heterosis.
A large difference of 
egg-hatching success between the two reciprocal F1 lines in that cross was best 
explained as fertilization incompatibility between Cameroon females and sperm 
carrying Uganda genes.
The results suggest that these populations have not 
converged to the same life-history phenotype and genetic architecture, despite 
120 generations of uniform natural selection.
However, the absence of 
outbreeding depression implies that they did not evolve toward different 
adaptive peaks.
DOI: 10.1111/j.0014-3820.2003.tb00262.x
PMID: 12683524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Action ofβ-(4-chlorophenyl-GABA) on uptake and metabolism of GABA in different subcellular fractions of rat brain 1. Experientia. 1978 Sep 15;34(9):1137-8. doi: 10.1007/BF01922915.

Action of beta-(4-chlorophenyl-GABA) on uptake and metabolism of GABA in 
different subcellular fractions of rat brain.

Tardy M
 Rolland B, Bardakjian J, Gonnard P.

DOI: 10.1007/BF01922915
PMID: 720504 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adenosine A3 receptor-mediated cardioprotection against doxorubicin-induced mitochondrial damage 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 2010 Jan 15;79(2):180-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.08.010.
Epub  2009 Aug 15.

Adenosine A3 receptor-mediated cardioprotection against doxorubicin-induced 
mitochondrial damage.

Emanuelov AK(1)
 Shainberg A, Chepurko Y, Kaplan D, Sagie A, Porat E, Arad M, 
Hochhauser E.

Author information:
(1)Gonda (Goldschmied) Medical Diagnostic Research Center, The Mina & Everard 
Goodman Faculty of Life Sciences, Bar-Ilan University, Ramat Gan, Israel.
Cardiotoxicity associated with doxorubicin (DOX) treatment limits the 
therapeutic efficiency of this drug against cancer.
2-Chloro-N(6)-(3-iodobenzyl)adenosine-5'-N-methyluronamide (Cl-IB-MECA), a 
selective agonist of A(3) adenosine receptor (A(3)R), reduces DOX toxicity in 
newborn rat cultured cardiomyocytes.
The study's aim was to determine whether 
the protection demonstrated by Cl-IB-MECA attenuates cardiac depression in vivo.
In addition, we wished to examine whether this protective pathway affects the 
sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR) calcium uptake and release, as well as 
intramitochondrial Ca(2+) accumulation induced by DOX.
Rats were injected every 
alternate day (6 times) with (1) saline, (2) 2.5mg/kg i.p.
DOX, (3) 33 microg/kg 
i.v.
Cl-IB-MECA, (4) DOX+Cl-IB-MECA.
Left ventricular functions were assessed by 
invasive (pressure) and non-invasive (echocardiography) techniques at the end of 
the injection period and 4 weeks later.
Cytosolic and intramitochondrial calcium 
levels were measured with indo-1 and rhod-2 probes.
SR Ca(2+) content was 
determined by exposing cultured rat cardiomyocytes to caffeine.
Echocardiography 
data demonstrate left ventricular wall thinning (23%), an increase in the end 
systolic dimension (170%) and decreased fractional shortening (35+/-5% vs. 
54+/-5%, p<0.01) in DOX-treated animals, compared to the control group.
DOX 
increased Ca(2+) levels in the cytosol and in mitochondria by diminishing the SR 
Ca(2+) uptake.
Pretreatment with Cl-IB-MECA attenuated left ventricular 
dysfunction, improved SR calcium storage capacity and prevented mitochondrial 
Ca(2+) overload.
We conclude that the adenosine A(3) receptor agonist is 
effective in vivo against DOX cardiotoxicity via the restoration of Ca(2+) 
homeostasis and prevention of mitochondrial damage that occurs as a result of 
Ca(2+) overload.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.08.010
PMID: 19686702 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pressure Regulation in the Middle Ear Cavity of Sea Lions: A Possible Mechanism <jats:p>The mucosa lining the cavity of the middle ear of sea lions contains a complex network of venous channels and sinuses. During dives the pressure within the middle ear may be equalized with that in the external auditory meatus either by the distention or depression of the mucosa due to the presence or absence of blood in the sinuses.</jats:p>
Zur frage der kohlenmonoxydauswirkung auf die mikrophon. und summenaktionspotentiale der meerschweinchencochlea 1. Arch Klin Exp Ohren Nasen Kehlkopfheilkd. 1968;190(1):24-35.

[On the problem of carbon monoxide effect on the microphonics and sum of action 
potentials of the guinea pig cochlea].

[Article in German]

Freigang B
 Seidel P, Flach M.

PMID: 5666704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
DISINHIBITION OF EXTINGUISHED CONDITIONED REFLEX UNDER SPREADING DEPRESSION. 1. Acta Physiol Acad Sci Hung. 1965;27:353-7.

DISINHIBITION OF EXTINGUISHED CONDITIONED REFLEX UNDER SPREADING DEPRESSION.

KORANYI L
 ENDROECZI E, LISSAK K.

PMID: 14336633 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Visual Cortex: Suppression by Depression? 1. Curr Biol. 2002 Aug 20;12(16):R547-9. doi: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01049-7.

Visual cortex: suppression by depression?

Mrsic-Flogel T(1)
 Hübener M.

Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Neurobiologie, Am Klopferspitz 18A, D-82152, 
Martinsried, Germany.
The response of a neuron in the visual cortex to an oriented light bar is 
strongly reduced by concurrent presentation of a stimulus with a different 
orientation.
New data suggest this 'cross-orientation suppression' is caused, 
not by intracortical inhibition, but by rapid depression of thalamocortical 
synapses.
DOI: 10.1016/s0960-9822(02)01049-7
PMID: 12194833 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Acute Nose-Only Exposure of Rats to Phosgene. Part I: Concentration × Time Dependence of LC<sub>50</sub>s
 Nonlethal-Threshold Concentrations, and Analysis of Breathing Patterns 1.
Inhal Toxicol.
2006 May;18(6):423-35. doi: 10.1080/08958370600563680.
Acute nose-only exposure of rats to phosgene.
Part I: concentration x time 
dependence of LC50s, nonlethal-threshold concentrations, and analysis of 
breathing patterns.
Pauluhn J(1).
Author information:
(1)Institute of Toxicology, Bayer Health Care, Wuppertal, Germany.
juergen.pauluhn@bayerhealthcare.com

Groups of young adult Wistar rats were acutely exposed to phosgene gas using a 
directed-flow nose-only mode of exposure.
The exposure durations used were 10, 
30, 60, and 240 min and the corresponding C x t products bracketed a range from 
1538 to 2854 mg/m3 x min.
The postexposure period was 2 wk.
Subgroups of rats 
were subjected to respiratory function measurements.
With few exceptions, 
mortality occurred within 24 h after exposure.
The median lethal concentration 
(LC50) and the estimated nonlethal threshold concentrations (LC01) for 10, 30, 
60, and 240 min were 253.3 (105.3), 54.5 (29.2), 31.3 (21.1), and 8.6 (5.3) 
mg/m3, respectively.
With regard to the fixed outcome Cn x t product, the 
exponent n was found to be approximately 0.9 for both the LC50 and the LC01.
Due 
to an apparent rodent-specific transient depression in ventilation, results from 
10-min exposures were excluded for the calculation of average C x t products.
The average LCt50 (and confidence interval 95%) and LCt01 were 1741 (1547-1929) 
mg/m3 x min and 1075 mg/m3 x min, respectively, with a LCt50/LCt01 ratio of 1.6.
Respiratory function measurements revealed an increased apnea time (AT), which 
is typical for lower respiratory tract irritants.
This response was associated 
with transiently decreased respiratory minute volumes.
Borderline, although 
distinct, changes in AT occurred at 1.2 x 30 mg/m3 x min and above, which did 
not show evidence of recovery during a 30-min postexposure period at 47.6 x 30 
mg/m3 x min and above.
In an ancillary study, one group of rats was exposed to 
1008 mg/m3 x min (at 4.2 mg/m3 for 240 min; postexposure period 4 wk).
Emphasis 
was on the time course of nonlethal endpoints (bronchoalveolar lavage, BAL) and 
histopathology of the lungs of rats sacrificed at the end of the 4-wk 
postexposure period.
The climax of BAL protein was on the first postexposure day 
and exceeded approximately 70 times the control without causing mortality.
The 
changes in BAL protein resolved within 2 wk.
Histopathology did not show 
evidence of lung remodeling or progressive, potentially irreversible changes 4 
wk postexposure.
In summary, the analysis of the C x t dependent mortality 
revealed a steep C x t mortality relationship.
The C x t product in the range of 
the nonlethal threshold concentration (1008 mg/m3 x min) caused pulmonary injury 
as indicated by markedly increased protein in BAL.
Changes resolved almost 
entirely within the 4-wk postexposure period.
DOI: 10.1080/08958370600563680
PMID: 16556582 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The effects of intravenous lidocaine on the activity of medullary respiratory neurons in cats]. 1. Masui. 1989 Jun;38(6):741-5.

[The effects of intravenous lidocaine on the activity of medullary respiratory 
neurons in cats].

[Article in Japanese]

Kasaba T
 Kosaka Y.
The effects of intravenous lidocaine on the activity of medullary respiratory 
neuron were studied in urethane anesthetized cats.
Using a tungsten 
microelectrode, spikes from medullary inspiratory neurons were recorded around 
nucleus ambiguous.
Lidocaine was administered using a constant-rate infusion 
pump until electrographic seizures appeared.
The effect of lidocaine on the 
activity of respiratory neurons showed two types.
In one type, consisting of 7 
units out of 10, a sequence of changes was observed: the initial stage was 
represented by increased duration of the burst and decreased frequency of neural 
discharge; the second stage by desynchronization with mechanical lung inflation; 
the third stage by continuous activity and the forth stage by decreased spike 
activity and electrographic seizures.
Blood concentration of the lidocaine was 
9.6 +/- 3.5 micrograms.ml-1 at the second stage, 15.3 +/- 4.4 micrograms.ml-1 at 
the third stage, 26.6 +/- 4.1 micrograms.ml-1 at the fourth stage.
In another 
type, consisting of 3 units out of 10, following administration of lidocaine the 
number of spikes showed only a concentration related depression.
Blood 
concentration of the lidocaine was 6.9 +/- 2.7 micrograms.ml-1 when the spikes 
disappeared.
These results indicate that intravenous lidocaine influences the 
respiratory rhythm and produces the respiratory depression working in the 
central nervous system.
PMID: 2795839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Gastric emptying and secretion in the calf on duodenal infusion of tryptophan
 tryptamine and 5‐hydroxytryptamine <jats:p>1.
Gastric emptying, gastric acid and pepsinogen secretion were assessed simultaneously in the conscious calf using the test meal and duodenal perfusion technique (Bell &amp; Mostaghni, 1975).</jats:p><jats:p>2.
When 60 m
<jats:sc>M</jats:sc>‐HCl was infused into the duodenum, gastric emptying was arrested but both acid and pepsinogen secretion continued at a low level.
Duodenal infusion with isotonic NaHCO<jats:sub>3</jats:sub> caused rapid exponential emptying of the test meal and acid and pepsinogen output was more than doubled.</jats:p><jats:p>3.
Duodenal infusion of amino acids in isotonic NaHCO<jats:sub>3</jats:sub> did not affect the rapid emptying, except infusion with tryptophan, which caused a measureable degree of inhibition of emptying, with concomitant effects on acid and pepsinogen secretion</jats:p><jats:p>4.
Tryptamine and 5‐hydroxytryptamine (5‐HT) incorporated in low concentration into isotonic NaHCO<jats:sub>3</jats:sub> also produced depression of gastric emptying, acid and pepsinogen levels comparable to the response initiated by acid infusate.
Tryptophan was effective only in non‐physiological amounts while 5‐HT and tryptamine were active in smaller doses.</jats:p><jats:p>5.
Our results suggest that the inhibition of gastric emptying following duodenal infusion of tryptophan noted by Stephens, Woolson &amp; Cooke (1975) may be due to the duodenal synthesis of its biogenic amine derivatives tryptamine and 5‐HT.</jats:p><jats:p>6.
The level of activity of the three gastric functions, emptying, acid secretion and pepsinogen secretion appears to be linked.
A single stimulus, therefore, could evoke a duodenal receptor or receptors to mediate or suppress activity of the gastric smooth muscle and secretory cells through interrelated mechanisms.
The effect of some duodenal infusates, however, produces some variability in response which suggests differential activation of different receptors with consequent variable motor activity on effector cells.</jats:p>
Molecular characterization of Blastocystis species in Oregon identifies multiple subtypes 1. Parasitol Res. 2010 Mar;106(4):827-32. doi: 10.1007/s00436-010-1739-8. Epub
2010  Feb 2.

Molecular characterization of Blastocystis species in Oregon identifies multiple 
subtypes.

Whipps CM(1)
 Boorom K, Bermudez LE, Kent ML.
Author information:
(1)Department of Environmental and Forest Biology, SUNY-ESF, State University of 
New York College of Environmental Science and Forestry, Syracuse, NY 13210, USA.
cwhipps@esf.edu

The association of Blastocystis species infections with gastrointestinal 
symptoms in humans is clouded by the variable presentation of disease and 
multiple lineages of the parasite that can infect humans and other animals.
It 
has long been suspected that certain subtypes of Blastocystis may be more or 
less pathogenic, be restricted to certain hosts, or have limits to their 
geographic distribution.
In the state of Oregon, USA, Blastocystis spp.
are the 
most commonly encountered parasites in fecal specimens submitted for diagnostic 
evaluation, yet the diversity of subtypes is unknown.
In this study, fecal 
samples were collected from individuals experiencing symptoms associated with 
blastocystosis and analyzed by polymerase chain reaction for presence of the 
parasite and DNA sequenced for subtyping.
Five of 19 individuals tested positive 
for the parasite, all of which were also positive by previous ova and 
parasitology examination.
DNA sequencing of the small subunit ribosomal DNA and 
elongation factor 1 alpha gene followed by phylogenetic subtyping identified 
five unique subtypes, representing Blastocystis subtypes 1, 2, 3, 4, and 8.
No 
symptoms were consistently associated with presence or absence of infection, 
although abdominal pain and fatigue were reported by all infected individuals.
Multiple subtypes are indicative of multiple sources of infection, suggesting 
more extensive surveys are required to understand the transmission of this 
parasite.
DOI: 10.1007/s00436-010-1739-8
PMID: 20127113 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Genotype Specific Competitive Ability Does Not Correlate with Infection in Natural Daphnia magna Populations 1. PLoS One. 2007 Dec 5;2(12):e1280. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001280.

The genotype specific competitive ability does not correlate with infection in 
natural Daphnia magna populations.

Altermatt F(1)
 Ebert D.

Author information:
(1)Zoologisches Institut, Universität Basel, Basel, Switzerland.
florian.altermatt@unibas.ch

BACKGROUND: Different evolutionary hypotheses predict a correlation between the 
fitness of a genotype in the absence of infection and the likelihood to become 
infected.
The cost of resistance hypothesis predicts that resistant genotypes 
pay a cost of being resistant and are less fit in the absence of parasites.
The 
inbreeding-infection hypothesis predicts that the susceptible individuals are 
less fit due to inbreeding depression.
METHODS AND RESULTS: Here we tested if a host's natural infection status was 
associated with its fitness.
First, we experimentally confirmed that cured but 
formerly infected Daphnia magna are genetically more susceptible to reinfections 
with Octosporea bayeri than naturally uninfected D. magna.
We then collected 
from each of 22 populations both uninfected and infected D. magna genotypes.
All 
were treated against parasites and kept in their asexual phase.
We estimated 
their relative fitness in an experiment against a tester genotype and in another 
experiment in direct competition.
Consistently, we found no difference in 
competitive abilities between uninfected and cured but formerly infected 
genotypes.
This was the case both in the presence as well as in the absence of 
sympatric parasites during the competition trials.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data do not support the inbreeding-infection hypothesis.
They 
also do not support a cost of resistance, however ignoring other parasite 
strains or parasite species.
We suggest as a possible explanation for our 
results that resistance genes might segregate largely independently of other 
fitness associated genes in this system.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0001280
PMCID: PMC2099476
PMID: 18060074 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
The onset of hyperreflexia in the rat following complete spinal cord transection 1. Spinal Cord. 2008 Dec;46(12):798-803. doi: 10.1038/sc.2008.49. Epub 2008 Jun
10.

The onset of hyperreflexia in the rat following complete spinal cord 
transection.

Yates C(1)
 Charlesworth A, Allen SR, Reese NB, Skinner RD, Garcia-Rill E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology and Developmental Sciences, University of Arkansas 
for Medical Sciences, Little Rock, AR 72205, USA.
STUDY DESIGN: Hyperreflexia occurs after spinal cord injury (SCI) and can be 
assessed by measuring low frequency-dependent depression of the H-reflex.
Previous studies showed the time course for the onset of hyperreflexia to occur 
between 6-28 days in the contusion model of SCI.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the time course of the onset of hyperreflexia in the 
transection model of SCI and examine changes in Connexin-36 (Cx-36) protein 
levels in the lumbar enlargement of animals.
SETTING: Spinal Cord Injury Mobilization Program of the Center for Translational 
Neuroscience, the research arm of the Jackson T. Stephens Neuroscience 
Institute, Little Rock, AR, USA.
METHODS: Adult female rats underwent transection at T10 level.
Low 
frequency-dependent depression of the H-reflex was tested at 7, 14 and 30 days 
post-transection.
Lumbar enlargement tissue was harvested following reflex 
testing and western blots were performed after immunoprecipitation to compare 
Cx-36 protein levels.
RESULTS: Significant decreases in low frequency-dependent depression of the 
H-reflex were observed in animals tested 14 and 30 days post-transection 
compared with control animals, but it was not different from control animals at 
7 days.
Significant decreases in Cx-36 protein levels were observed in animals 7 
days post-transection compared with controls.
CONCLUSION: Rats transition to a state of hyperreflexia between 7 and 14 days 
post-transection.
Cx-36 protein levels decreased at 7 days post-transection and 
gradually returned to control levels by 30 days post-transection.
These data 
suggest there may be a relationship between changes in neuronal gap junction 
protein levels and the delayed onset of hyperreflexia.
DOI: 10.1038/sc.2008.49
PMCID: PMC3327293
PMID: 18542097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reversed Postoptokinetic Nystagmus: A Model of Plasticity in the Vestibuloocular System 1. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 1979;39(6):477-90.

Reversed postoptokinetic nystagmus: a model of plasticity in the vestibuloocular 
system.

Bures J
 Neverov VP.
A simple manifestation of the memorial processes is the so called reversed 
postoptokinetic nystagmus (RPN), a trace phenomenon elicited in the rabbit by 
prolonged (60 min) optokinetic (OK) stimulation.
Electrophysiological analysis 
of RPN indicated that the underlying neural trace is weakened, but not 
suppressed by spreading depression in the cerebral cortex or superior 
colliculus.
An asymmetry of RPN is brought about by unilateral 6-OHDA lesion on 
substantia nigra.
Electroconvulsive shock applied immediately after a period of 
OK stimulation blocks the subsequent RPN without interfering with OKN.
About 70 
percent of neurons in the vestibular complex changed their activity during OKN 
and RPK.
The changes consisted in most cases of an excitation accompanying OKN 
and inhibition during RPN.
The OKN-RPN related reacti6ns were also abundant in 
flocculus but significant activity changes during RPN were less frequent in this 
structure.
Units in midbrain reticular formation reacted both during OKN and RPN 
in a similar fashion as the vestibular ones.
On the other hand units in the 
cerebellar deep nuclei and brachium conjunctivum were only weakly influenced by 
OKN and/or RPN.
It is suggested that the neural trace of RPN develops in the 
vestibular complex and vestibulocerebellum as a part of the process compensating 
the effect of continued optokinetic stimulation.
Flocculus participates in input 
processing of the optokinetic stimulation whereas reticular formation mediates 
signal transmission to oculomotor and higher integrating centers.
The trace, 
revealed by sudden cessation of the eliciting stimulus in absence of visual 
reference signals is probably the neural substrate of the so called motion 
habituation and visual hallucinations.
As other compensatory phenomena in the 
motor system, RPN has features of instrumental (it improves the organisms 
control of environment) and classical (it is automatically established and 
involuntarily emitted) conditioning.
PMID: 547705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of disodium fumarate on microbial abundance
 ruminal fermentation and methane emission in goats under different forage : concentrate ratios 1.
Animal.
2012 Nov;6(11):1788-94. doi: 10.1017/S1751731112000857.
Epub 2012 Apr 
27.
Effect of disodium fumarate on microbial abundance, ruminal fermentation and 
methane emission in goats under different forage: concentrate ratios.
Yang CJ(1), Mao SY, Long LM, Zhu WY.
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Gastrointestinal Microbiology, College of Animal Science and 
Technology, Nanjing Agricultural University, Nanjing, Jiangsu 210095, PR China.
This study investigated the effects of disodium fumarate (DF) on methane 
emission, ruminal fermentation and microbial abundance in goats under different 
forage (F) : concentrate (C) ratios and fed according to maintenance 
requirements.
Four ruminally fistulated, castrated male goats were used in a 4 × 
4 Latin square design with a 2 × 2 factorial arrangement of treatments and the 
main factors being the F : C ratios (41 : 59 or 58 : 42) and DF supplementation 
(0 or 10 g/day).
DF reduced methane production (P < 0.05) on average by 11.9%, 
irrespective of the F : C ratio.
The concentrations of total volatile fatty 
acids, acetate and propionate were greater in the rumen of goats supplemented 
with DF (P < 0.05), whereas the abundance of methanogens was lower (P < 0.05).
In high-forage diets, the abundance of Selenomonas ruminantium, a 
fumarate-reducing bacterium, was greater in the rumen of goats supplemented with 
DF.
The abundance of fungi, protozoa, Ruminococus flavefaciens and Fibrobacter 
succinogenes were not affected by the addition of DF.
Variable F : C ratios 
affected the abundance of methanogens, fungi and R. flavefaciens (P < 0.05), but 
did not affect methane emission.
The result implied that DF had a beneficial 
effect on the in vivo rumen fermentation of the goats fed diets with different F 
: C ratios and that this effect were not a direct action on anaerobic fungi, 
protozoa and fibrolytic bacteria, the generally recognized fiber-degrading and 
hydrogen-producing microorganisms, but due to the stimulation of 
fumarate-reducing bacteria and the depression of methanogens.
DOI: 10.1017/S1751731112000857
PMID: 22717128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selenium toxicosis in three California sea lions (Zalophus californianus). 1. Vet Hum Toxicol. 1989 Dec;31(6):568-70.

Selenium toxicosis in three California sea lions (Zalophus californianus).

Edwards WC(1)
 Whitenack DL, Alexander JW, Solangi MA.
Author information:
(1)College of Veterinary Medicine, Oklahoma State University, Stillwater 74078.
Selenium poisoning occurs worldwide in nearly all domestic animals.
Acute 
selenium poisoning is associated with feeding high levels or injecting excessive 
amounts of selenium and is usually fatal.
The acute poisoning may cause 
gastrointestinal disturbance, muscle weakness, depression of the central nervous 
system, prostration and death (1-2).
Chronic selenium poisoning in cattle, sheep 
and horses may result from the consumption of seleniferous plants over an 
extended period of time.
Chronic selenium results in ataxia, incoordination, 
partial blindness, paralysis, loss of hair or wool, abnormal hoof growth and 
possibly abnormal changes in behavior (1).
There is little information regarding 
the clinical signs and pathology of selenium toxicosis in marine mammals.
Likewise, there is little information regarding normal tissue levels or 
toxicologically significant levels of selenium in these species.
The results of 
these investigations in sea lions, based on clinical signs, pathologic findings 
and tissue levels of selenium, suggest subacute or chronic selenium poisoning 
was most likely from dietary fish high in selenium.
PMID: 2617840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Description of a model to simulate effects of <i>Eimeria acervulina</i> infection on broiler production <jats:title>Summary</jats:title><jats:p>A simulation model for effects of <jats:italic>Eimeria acervulina</jats:italic> infection on technical and economic characteristics in broiler production is presented. The model describes development over time of the growth depression
 feed intake reduction, and decrease in feed efficiency associated with infection.
The model also shows a phase of compensatory growth during which earlier negative effects are counterbalanced, at least partly.
Major assumptions made were: infection with <jats:italic>E.
acervulina</jats:italic> occurs in each flock; production is affected in each flock; compensatory growth takes place because immunity develops and cell regeneration occurs.
The results show that the pattern of development of the production characteristics during a flock cycle depends on the initial contamination level.
Both a high and low initial contamination level results in a lower average daily gain, a worse feed to gain ratio, and a reduced net revenue compared to an intermediate contamination level.</jats:p>
Hyperhomocysteinemia Is a Result
 Rather than a Cause, of Depression under Chronic Stress 1.
PLoS One.
2014 Oct 6;9(10):e106625.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106625.
eCollection 2014.
Hyperhomocysteinemia is a result, rather than a cause, of depression under 
chronic stress.
Chengfeng S(1), Wei L(2), Xinxing W(3), Lei W(2), Rui Z(4), Lingjia Q(4).
Author information:
(1)Tianjin Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, Tianjin, China.
(2)Institute of Health & Environmental Medicine, Tianjin, China.
(3)Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing, China; Institute of 
Health & Environmental Medicine, Tianjin, China.
(4)Beijing Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, Beijing, China.
BACKGROUND: Although the accumulation of homocysteine (Hcy) has been implicated 
in the pathogenesis of depression, whether Hcy is directly involved and acts as 
the primary cause of depressive symptoms remains unclear.
The present study was 
designed to clarify whether increased Hcy plays an important role in 
stress-induced depression.
RESULTS: We employed the chronic unpredictable mild stress model (CUMS) of 
depression for 8 weeks to observe changes in the plasma Hcy level in the 
development of depression.
The results showed that Wistar rats exposed to a 
series of mild, unpredictable stressors for 4 weeks displayed depression-like 
symptoms such as anhedonia (decreased sucrose preferences) and a decreased 
5-Hydroxy Tryptophan (5-HT) concentration in the hippocampus.
At the end of 8 
weeks, the plasma Hcy level increased in the CUMS rats.
The anti-depressant 
sertraline could decrease the plasma Hcy level and improve the depression-like 
symptoms in the CUMS rats.
RhBHMT, an Hcy metabolic enzyme, could decrease the 
plasma Hcy level significantly, although it could not improve the depressive 
symptoms in the CUMS rats.
CONCLUSIONS: The results obtained from the experiments did not support the 
hypothesis that the increased Hcy concentration mediated the provocation of 
depression in CUMS rats, and the findings suggested that the increased Hcy 
concentration in the plasma might be the result of stress-induced depression.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0106625
PMCID: PMC4186820
PMID: 25286230 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Long-term potentiation in mice lacking synapsins 1. Neuropharmacology. 1995 Nov;34(11):1573-9. doi: 10.1016/0028-3908(95)00107-h.

Long-term potentiation in mice lacking synapsins.

Spillane DM(1)
 Rosahl TW, Südhof TC, Malenka RC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California, San Francisco 94143-0984, 
USA.
Synapsin I and synapsin II are widely expressed synaptic vesicle phosphoproteins 
that have been proposed to play an important role in synaptic transmission and 
synaptic plasticity.
To gain further insight into the functional significance of 
the phosphorylation sites on the synapsins, we have examined a number of 
synaptic processes thought to be mediated by protein kinases in knockout mice 
lacking both forms of synapsin (Rosahl et al., 1995).
Long-term potentiation 
(LTP) at both the mossy fiber (MF)-CA3 pyramidal cell synapse and the Schaffer 
collateral-CA1 pyramidal cell synapse appears normal in hippocampal slices 
prepared from mice lacking synapsins.
Moreover, the effects on synaptic 
transmission of forskolin at MF synapses and H-7 at synapses on CA1 cells are 
also normal in the mutant mice.
These results indicate that the synapsins are 
not necessary for: (1) the induction or expression of two different forms of LTP 
in the hippocampus, (2) the enhancement in transmitter release elicited by 
activation of the cAMP-dependent protein kinase (PKA) and (3) the depression of 
synaptic transmission caused by H-7.
Although disappointing, these results are 
important in that they exclude the most abundant family of synaptic 
phosphoproteins as an essential component of long-term synaptic plasticity.
DOI: 10.1016/0028-3908(95)00107-h
PMID: 8606805 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The lack of an inhibitory effect of hyaluronate on chondrogenesis in chick limb-bud mesoderm cells grown in culture 1. Cell Differ. 1978 Oct;7(5):283-93. doi: 10.1016/0045-6039(78)90029-5.

The lack of an inhibitory effect of hyaluronate on chondrogenesis in chick 
limb-bud mesoderm cells grown in culture.

Finch RA
 Parker CL, Walton ST.
The effect of hyaluronate on chondrogenesis in cultures of chick limb-bud 
mesoderm cells, derived from stage 20--21, 23--24 and 26 embryos grown at 
different cell densities and in 3 different culture media, was studied.
The 
results show that hyaluronate at a concentration of 500 microgram/ml, does not 
consistently produce an inhibition of chondrogenesis in cultures of stage 
20--21, 23--24 or 26 limb-bud mesoderm cells in contrast to what has been 
reported by Toole et al.
(1972).
It was demonstrated that under optimal 
conditions, stage 26 cells grown in the absence of hyaluronate do not form as 
many cartilage colonies in culture as do cells from stage 20--21 or 23--24 
embryos.
It was determined that culture medium composed of Eagle's MEM 
supplemented with 7% horse serum, 3% fetal calf serum and 5% 10-day chick embryo 
extract supported chondrogenesis significantly better than Ham's F-12 
supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum.
Our results suggest that the inhibition 
of chondrogenesis by hyaluronate reported earlier is most likely due to the 
sub-optimal conditions of growth medium, cell density and embryonic stage than 
to the hyaluronate treatment.
DOI: 10.1016/0045-6039(78)90029-5
PMID: 699055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic oral treatment with isotretinoin alters measures of activity but not anxiety in male and female rats 1. Neurotoxicol Teratol. 2010 Sep-Oct;32(5):573-8. doi:
10.1016/j.ntt.2010.03.009.  Epub 2010 Apr 8.

Chronic oral treatment with isotretinoin alters measures of activity but not 
anxiety in male and female rats.

Ferguson SA(1)
 Berry KJ.
Author information:
(1)Division of Neurotoxicology, National Center for Toxicological Research/FDA, 
3900 NCTR Road, Jefferson, AR 72079, USA.
Sherry.Ferguson@fda.hhs.gov

Use of the anti-acne drug, Accutane (ACC) (isotretinoin, 13-cis-retinoic acid), 
has been associated with neuropsychiatric events ranging from depression in 
animal models to depression and suicide ideation in humans.
Our studies, 
however, have consistently indicated few effects on measures of depression in 
male and female rats.
Still, the comorbidity of depression and anxiety suggests 
that anxiety assessments in ACC-treated rats could be informative.
Such 
assessments must be balanced with measures of activity since drug-induced 
activity alterations may impact the expression of anxiety-like behaviors.
Here, 
Sprague-Dawley rats (n=15/sex/dose) were gavaged daily with 0 (soy oil), 7.5, or 
30 mg/kg/day ACC beginning on postnatal day (PND) 59.
Blood ACC levels similar 
to humans taking recommended ACC doses are produced by 7.5mg/kg/day.
Short-term 
activity was assessed in open fields prior to ACC treatment (PND 51) and again 
at PNDs 129 and 164 and in a complex environment at PNDs 66 and PND 184.
Long-term residential activity was measured in running wheels (PNDs 85-92) and 
figure 8 mazes (PNDs 99-106).
Anxiety-like behavior was assessed via elevated 
plus maze (EPM) activity on PND 98 and in a black/white apparatus on PND 125.
The typical sex differences in most behaviors were exhibited (i.e., increased 
EPM open arm entries and overall activity in most measures in females); however, 
there were no significant effects of ACC treatment on open field activity, 
complex environment activity, residential running wheel activity, or EPM 
activity.
Residential figure 8 maze activity indicated that male and female rats 
treated with 30 mg/kg/day were less active on all nights (p<0.05) and females 
treated with 7.5 or 30 mg/kg/day were less active than same-sex controls on most 
days (p<0.05).
Similarly, rats of both sexes treated with 30 mg/kg/day were 
significantly less active in the black/white apparatus (p<0.05), entering the 
darkened area less frequently (p<0.05), although duration in the darkened area 
did not differ.
These data indicate that at blood levels typically achieved by 
humans (i.e., the 7.5 mg/kg group), there are no significant anxiogenic effects 
associated with ACC treatment.
At higher ACC levels, there are mild effects on 
activity but these appear to be apparatus- and/or age-specific.
Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.ntt.2010.03.009
PMID: 20381607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of D actinomycin on the spontaneous activity of the isolated ileum and atrium of rabbits and on the activity of various pharmacologic agents]. 1. Agressologie. 1967 Mar-Apr;8(2):137-42.

[Effect of D actinomycin on the spontaneous activity of the isolated ileum and 
atrium of rabbits and on the activity of various pharmacologic agents].

[Article in French]

Laborit H
 Weber B.

PMID: 5602121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Influence of Hypocarbia on the Resolution of Transient Increases in Brain Extracellular Potassium 1. Anesthesiology. 1987 Mar;66(3):350-5. doi: 10.1097/00000542-198703000-00015.

The influence of hypocarbia on the resolution of transient increases in brain 
extracellular potassium.

Mutch WA
 Gardner-Medwin AR.
The effect of acute hypocarbia on baseline extracellular K+ concentration [( 
K+]e) and its effect on the ability of the cerebral microenvironment to recover 
from transient increases in [K+]e has been assessed in rats.
Spreading 
depression of cortical activity was used to present a reproducible K+ load to 
the extracellular space.
Baseline [K+]e and the half-time for resolution of the 
[K+]e changes seen with spreading depression waves were measured for the 
hypocarbic and normocarbic states by means of double-barrelled K+ 
microelectrodes placed approximately 400 micron below the cortical surface.
Three spreading depression waves were initiated in each animal for the two CO2 
states.
In group 1 (n = 10), the rats were initially normocarbic (PaCO2 41.6 +/- 
3.0 mmHg; mean +/- SD), then hypocarbic (PaCO2 19.0 +/- 2.5 mmHg) for the second 
series of measurements.
The baseline [K+]e was significantly higher in the 
normocarbic state 3.4 +/- 0.4 versus 3.0 +/- 0.4 mM l-1, P less than 0.01 
(paired t test).
During normocarbia, the K+ load (delta[K+]e) presented to the 
extracellular space following spreading depression was 49.4 +/- 7.5 mM l-1, n = 
10 (peak [K+]e - baseline [K+]e).
The half-time for resolution of the presented 
[K+]e load was 24.3 +/- 6.1 s. Following hypocarbia of 1.4 +/- 0.6 h, there was 
no change in delta[K+]e (49.0 +/- 6.0 mM l-1) but resolution t1/2 had increased 
to 35.8 +/- 11.2 s, P less than 0.01 paired t test.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1097/00000542-198703000-00015
PMID: 3103487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Activation Conditions for the Induction of Metabotropic Glutamate Receptor-Dependent Long-Term Depression in Hippocampal CA1 Pyramidal Cells <jats:p>Two forms of homosynaptic long-term depression (LTD) are distinguished in hippocampal CA1 pyramidal cells
 one which is NMDA receptor dependent and the other metabotropic glutamate receptor (mGluR) dependent.
Although the molecular processes involved in mGluR-LTD are well characterized, the conditions of circuit activation required for its induction remain unclear.
We show that mGluR-LTD cannot be induced in synaptically coupled CA3–CA1 pyramidal cell pairs.
Experiments to address the underlying mechanisms indicate that, even when glutamate transporters are blocked, one presynaptic cell releases insufficient glutamate to evoke an mGluR-mediated current in a connected CA1 cell.
These findings imply that extrasynaptic diffusion is not a limiting factor and are consistent with a sparse distribution of functional mGluRs in the dendritic tree of pyramidal cells.
Thus, the discharge of multiple Schaffer collaterals to a targeted cell is necessary for mGluR-LTD. Our experiments indicate that approximately eight CA3 inputs to a CA1 pyramidal cell must be activated to induce mGluR-LTD.</jats:p>
Partial effects of the AMPAkine CX717 in a strain specific battery of tests for manic-like behavior in black Swiss mice 1. Pharmacol Rep. 2015 Oct;67(5):928-33. doi: 10.1016/j.pharep.2015.02.008. Epub 
2015 Mar 4.

Partial effects of the AMPAkine CX717 in a strain specific battery of tests for 
manic-like behavior in black Swiss mice.

Kara NZ(1)
 Flaisher-Grinberg S(2), Einat H(3).
Author information:
(1)School of Behavioral Sciences, Tel Aviv-Yaffo Academic College, Tel-Aviv, 
Israel; Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel.
(2)Department of Psychology, Winona State University, Winona, USA.
(3)School of Behavioral Sciences, Tel Aviv-Yaffo Academic College, Tel-Aviv, 
Israel; Department of Clinical Biochemistry and Pharmacology, Ben-Gurion 
University of the Negev, Beersheba, Israel; College of Pharmacy, University of 
Minnesota, Duluth, USA.
Electronic address: haimh@mta.ac.il.
BACKGROUND: AMPA receptors are highly expressed throughout the central nervous 
system and are suggested to be involved in mood regulation.
Studies found 
changes in glutamate, its metabolites and receptors in patients with bipolar 
disorder (BPD) or major depression (MD) and in animal models of stress.
Additional data suggest that the glutamatergic system and AMPA receptors 
specifically, have an important role in modulating the therapeutic effects of 
mood stabilizers.
Further research on the role of AMPA receptors in mood 
regulation can be done using AMPAkines, positive modulators of AMPA receptors.
AMPAkines have been studied for cognitive enhancement in neurodegenerative 
disorders and some were also examined in preclinical studies of mood disorders.
In that context, the present study was designed to test the effects of the 
AMPAkine CX717 in a strain specific battery of tests for mania-like behaviors.
METHODS: Black Swiss male mice were sub-chronically treated with 5 different 
doses of CX717 or vehicle and tested in a battery of behavioral tests including 
spontaneous activity, sweet solution preference, resident-intruder, forced swim 
and amphetamine-induced hyperactivity.
RESULTS: Data show that CX717 doses of 30mg/kg and above, but not lower, reduce 
activity levels.
Moreover, 45mg/kg and above reduce interactions in the 
resident-intruder test and ameliorate amphetamine-induced hyperactivity.
CONCLUSIONS: The results therefore show a partial effect of CX717 on manic-like 
behavior, somewhat similar to previously demonstrated effects of atypical 
antipsychotic drugs in this strain.
It is therefore suggested that further work 
related to AMPAkines in the treatment of affective disorders might be warranted.
Copyright © 2015 Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of Sciences.
Published by Elsevier Urban & Partner Sp.
z o.o.
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pharep.2015.02.008
PMID: 26398387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Excitability changes in non-specific thalamic nuclei during cortical spreading depression in the rat 1. Electroencephalogr Clin Neurophysiol. 1963 Feb;15:73-83. doi: 
10.1016/0013-4694(63)90040-3.

Excitability changes in non-specific thalamic nuclei during cortical spreading 
depression in the rat.

BURES J
 BURESOVA O, WEISS T, FIFKOVA E.

DOI: 10.1016/0013-4694(63)90040-3
PMID: 14016940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic Intermittent Hypoxia Depresses Afferent Neurotransmission in NTS Neurons by a Reduction in the Number of Active Synapses <jats:p>Long-term synaptic plasticity has been recently described in brainstem areas associated to visceral afferent sensory integration. Chronic intermittent hypoxia (CIH)
 an animal model for studying obstructive sleep apnea in humans, depresses the afferent neurotransmission in nucleus tractus solitarii (NTS) neurons, which affect respiratory and autonomic regulation.
Here we identified the synaptic mechanisms of CIH-induced depression of the afferent neurotransmission in NTS neurons in juvenile rats.
We verified that CIH reduced the amplitude of both NMDA and non-NMDA glutamatergic excitatory currents (eEPSCs) evoked by tractus solitarii stimulation (TS-eEPSC) of second-order neurons in the NTS.
No changes were observed in release probability, evidenced by absence of any CIH-elicited effects on short-term depression and failures in EPSCs evoked in low calcium.
CIH also produced no changes in TS-eEPSC quantal size, since the amplitudes of both low calcium-evoked EPSCs and asynchronous TS-eEPSCs (evoked in the presence of Sr<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>) were unchanged.
Using single TS afferent fiber stimulation in slices from control and CIH rats we clearly show that CIH reduced the quantal content of the TS-eEPSCs without affecting the quantal size or release probability, suggesting a reduction in the number of active synapses as the mechanism of CIH induced TS-eEPSC depression.
In accordance with this concept, the input–output relationship of stimulus intensity and TS-eEPSC amplitude shows an early saturation in CIH animals.
These findings open new perspectives for a better understanding of the mechanisms underlying the synaptic plasticity in the brainstem sensory neurons under challenges such as those produced by CIH in experimental and pathological conditions.</jats:p>
[Effects of acetazolamide and epinephrine on aqueous flow rate in rhesus monkey (author's transl)]. 1. Nippon Ganka Gakkai Zasshi. 1977;81(3):235-40.

[Effects of acetazolamide and epinephrine on aqueous flow rate in rhesus monkey 
(author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Takase M.

PMID: 404859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Novel Cellular Mechanism of Human 5-HT6 Receptor through an Interaction with Fyn 1. J Biol Chem. 2007 Feb 23;282(8):5496-505. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M606215200. Epub
2006  Dec 22.

The novel cellular mechanism of human 5-HT6 receptor through an interaction with 
Fyn.

Yun HM(1)
 Kim S, Kim HJ, Kostenis E, Kim JI, Seong JY, Baik JH, Rhim H.

Author information:
(1)Biomedical Research Center, Korea Institute of Science and Technology, Seoul 
136-791, Korea.
The human 5-HT(6) receptor (5-HT(6)R) is one of the latest cloned receptors 
among the known 5-HT receptors.
Its abundant distribution in the limbic region, 
which participates in the control of mood and emotion and is involved in nervous 
system diseases such as depression and Alzheimer disease, has caused it to 
generate much interest.
However, the cellular mechanisms of 5-HT(6)R are poorly 
understood.
In the present study we found, using a yeast two-hybrid assay, that 
the carboxyl-terminal region of 5-HT(6)R interacts with the Fyn-tyrosine kinase.
We also determined using a glutathione S-transferase pulldown assay that this 
interaction was mediated through the SH3 domain of Fyn and confirmed this by 
co-immunoprecipitation assays in two different transfected cell lines as well as 
in adult rat brains.
Immunocyto(histo)chemistry also showed prominent 
co-localization between 5-HT(6)R and Fyn in transfected cells and a similar 
distribution between 5-HT(6)R and Fyn in the rat brain.
Based on this 
interaction, we further examined the modulation of 5-HT(6)R by Fyn and vice 
versa.
In addition, we demonstrated that the activation of 5-HT(6)R activated 
the extracellular signal-regulated kinase1/2 via an Fyn-dependent pathway.
These 
findings suggest that Fyn may play an important role in 5-HT(6)R- mediated 
signaling pathways in the central nervous system.
DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M606215200
PMID: 17189269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Neuromodulators Control the Polarity of Spike-Timing-Dependent Synaptic Plasticity 1. Neuron. 2007 Sep 20;55(6):919-29. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.08.013.

Neuromodulators control the polarity of spike-timing-dependent synaptic 
plasticity.

Seol GH(1)
 Ziburkus J, Huang S, Song L, Kim IT, Takamiya K, Huganir RL, Lee HK, 
Kirkwood A.
Author information:
(1)The Mind/Brain Institute, Johns Hopkins University, Baltimore, MD 21218, USA.
Erratum in
    Neuron.
2007 Nov 21;56(4):754.
Near coincidental pre- and postsynaptic action potentials induce associative 
long-term potentiation (LTP) or long-term depression (LTD), depending on the 
order of their timing.
Here, we show that in visual cortex the rules of this 
spike-timing-dependent plasticity are not rigid, but shaped by neuromodulator 
receptors coupled to adenylyl cyclase (AC) and phospholipase C (PLC) signaling 
cascades.
Activation of the AC and PLC cascades results in phosphorylation of 
postsynaptic glutamate receptors at sites that serve as specific "tags" for LTP 
and LTD. As a consequence, the outcome (i.e., whether LTP or LTD) of a given 
pattern of pre- and postsynaptic firing depends not only on the order of the 
timing, but also on the relative activation of neuromodulator receptors coupled 
to AC and PLC.
These findings indicate that cholinergic and adrenergic 
neuromodulation associated with the behavioral state of the animal can control 
the gating and the polarity of cortical plasticity.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2007.08.013
PMCID: PMC2756178
PMID: 17880895 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
PSD-95 uncoupling from NMDA receptors by Tat-<i>N</i>-dimer ameliorates neuronal depolarization in cortical spreading depression <jats:p> Cortical spreading depression is associated with activation of NMDA receptors
 which interact with the postsynaptic density protein 95 (PSD-95) that binds to nitric oxide synthase (nNOS).
Here, we tested whether inhibition of the nNOS/PSD-95/NMDA receptor complex formation by anti-ischemic compound, UCCB01-144 (Tat- N-dimer) ameliorates the persistent effects of cortical spreading depression on cortical function.
Using in vivo two-photon microscopy in somatosensory cortex in mice, we show that fluorescently labelled Tat- N-dimer readily crosses blood-brain barrier and accumulates in nerve cells during the first hour after i.v.
injection.
The Tat- N-dimer suppressed stimulation-evoked synaptic activity by 2–20%, while cortical blood flow and cerebral oxygen metabolic (CMRO<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>) responses were preserved.
During cortical spreading depression, the Tat- N-dimer reduced the average amplitude of the negative shift in direct current potential by 33% (4.1 mV).
Furthermore, the compound diminished the average depression of spontaneous electrocorticographic activity by 11% during first 40 min of post-cortical spreading depression recovery, but did not mitigate the suppressing effect of cortical spreading depression on cortical blood flow and CMRO<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>.
We suggest that uncoupling of PSD-95 from NMDA receptors reduces overall neuronal excitability and the amplitude of the spreading depolarization wave.
These findings may be of interest for understanding the neuroprotective effects of the nNOS/PSD-95 uncoupling in stroke.
</jats:p>
A Pertussis Toxin-Sensitive 8-Lipoxygenase Pathway Is Activated by a Nicotinic Acetylcholine Receptor in<i>Aplysia</i>Neurons <jats:p>Acetylcholine (ACh) activates two types of chloride conductances in Aplysia neurons that can be distinguished by their kinetics and pharmacology. One is a rapidly desensitizing current that is blocked by α-conotoxin-ImI and the other is a sustained current that is insensitive to the toxin. These currents are differentially expressed in Aplysia neurons. We report here that neurons that respond to ACh with a sustained chloride conductance also generate 8-lipoxygenase metabolites. The sustained chloride conductance and the activation of 8-lipoxygenase have similar pharmacological profiles. Both are stimulated by suberyldicholine and nicotine
 and both are inhibited by α-bungarotoxin.
Like the sustained chloride conductance, the activation of 8-lipoxygenase is not blocked by α-conotoxin-ImI.
In spite of the similarities between the metabolic and electrophysiological responses, the generation of 8-lipoxygenase metabolites does not appear to depend on the ion current since an influx of chloride ions is neither necessary nor sufficient for the formation of the lipid metabolites.
In addition, the application of pertussis toxin blocked the ACh-activated release of arachidonic acid and the subsequent production of 8-lipoxygenase metabolites, yet the ACh-induced activation of the chloride conductance is not dependent on a G protein.
Our results are consistent with the idea that the nicotinic ACh receptor that activates the sustained chloride conductance can, independent of the chloride ion influx, initiate lipid messenger synthesis.</jats:p>
Effect of 4-hydroxypyrazolo[3
4-d]pyrimidine (allopurinol) administration of growth of Ehrlich tumor cells.
1.
Gan.
1976 Dec;67(6):903-7.
Effect of 4-hydroxypyrazolo[3,4-d]pyrimidine (allopurinol) administration of 
growth of Ehrlich tumor cells.
Kizu A, Kusaba A, Nakamura M, Kato S, Sawada K.

Effect of the administration of 4-hydroxypyrazolo([3,4-d]pyrimidine 
(allopurinol) on the growth of Ehrlich ascites tumor cells was investigated in 
an in vivo system.
Oral administration of allopurinol (0.1% in diet) suppressed 
the growth of both ascites and solid types of the tumor after the implantation 
of Ehrlich tumor cells in mice.
The inhibitory action depended on the dose but 
was lost repidly when the administration was interrupted.
Possible mechanisms 
involved in the inhibitory effect of allopurinol on tumor growth were briefly 
discussed.
PMID: 1021510 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Experimental study on prevention and treatment of bronchial asthma by compound Chinese herbal monomer recipe]. 1. Zhongguo Zhong Xi Yi Jie He Za Zhi. 2004 Aug;24(8):717-21.

[Experimental study on prevention and treatment of bronchial asthma by compound 
Chinese herbal monomer recipe].

[Article in Chinese]

Dong JC(1)
 Ni J, Gong ZH.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Pulmonary and Atopic Diseases by Integrative Chinese and Western 
Medicine, Huashan Hospital, Fudan University, Shanghai.
jcdong2004@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of compound Chinese herbal monomer (CHM) 
recipe, consisted of ligustrazin (3.75 mg/kg x d), baicalin (7.5 mg/kg x d) and 
ginkgolide (2 mg/kg x d), on airway atopic inflammation and hyper-responsiveness 
in asthma.
METHODS: Model guinea pigs of asthma were randomly divided into three groups, 
the model group, the CHM group and the cromlyn sodium (CS) group, they were 
treated by atomizing inhalation with normal saline, CHM and CS respectively.
The 
eosinophil count and eosinophil cation protein (ECP) in blood and bronchial 
alveolar lavage fluid (BALF), and total cell count in BALF were measured and 
compared.
And the effect of treatment on the airway hyperresponsiveness and 
pathology among groups were compared.
RESULTS: CHM showed significant inhibition on blood eosinophil count and BALF 
and total cell count in BALF, showing significant difference (P < 0.05 or P < 
0.01) as compared with those in the model group.
The level of ECP was not 
different in the various groups.
Airway responsiveness determination showed that 
CHM has significant inhibitory action on it.
And the pathology of airway 
inflammation in the CHM group was significantly milder than that in the model 
group.
CONCLUSION: The compound inhalation liquid consisted of ligustrazin, baicalin 
and ginkgolide, has the anti-asthmatic airway atopic inflammation and depression 
on airway hyper-responsiveness, suggesting that components of compound CHM 
recipe could inhibit the multiple pathogenetic asthmatic inflammation from 
different angles and on multiple targets, so as to cure asthma effectively.
PMID: 15366597 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Bicarbonate Secretion by the Rat Colon: Effect of Intraluminal Chloride and Acetazolamide 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1970 Oct;135(1):116-22. doi:
10.3181/00379727-135-35001.

Bicarbonate secretion by the rat colon: effect of intraluminal chloride and 
acetazolamide.

Phillips SF
 Schmalz PF.
DOI: 10.3181/00379727-135-35001
PMID: 4990912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Correction of psychodepressive effects of benzodiazepine tranquilizers by administration of psychostimulants]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1982 Oct;94(10):48-51.

[Correction of psychodepressive effects of benzodiazepine tranquilizers by 
administration of psychostimulants].

[Article in Russian]

Bobkov IuG
 Morozov IS.
PMID: 6129008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chemical constituents and antidepressant activity of the new species Hypericum enshiense occurring in China 1. Phytomedicine. 2010 May;17(6):410-3. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2009.07.015. Epub 
2009 Aug 21.

Chemical constituents and antidepressant activity of the new species Hypericum 
enshiense occurring in China.

Wang D(1)
 Bai J, Sun F, Yang D.

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Sun Yat-sen University, Guangzhou 510006, 
China.
Hypericum enshiense L. H. Wu et F. S. Wang is a new species of Hypericum 
occurring in China, which was first identified and denominated by our 
laboratory.
No research has been reported on the antidepressant activity and 
chemical constituents of this new species.
In this study, the qualitative and 
quantitative analyses of the chemical constituents in the hydroalcoholic extract 
of this species were performed using HPLC/DAD/ESI-MS online method.
Hypericin, 
pseudohypericin and some flavonoids were identified or tentatively identified.
Furthermore, H. enshiense had a high content of hypericins than H. perforatum.
In addition, the antidepressant activity of the hydroalcoholic extract of the 
species was investigated using forced swimming test (FST) and tail suspension 
test (TST).
The extract significantly shortened the immobility time in FST and 
TST, while did not alter the locomoter activity of mice.
These results suggested 
for the first time that the hydroalcoholic extract of H. enshiense might possess 
potential antidepressant-like activity in the animal behavioral models, and this 
species might act as a new potential resource for developing antidepressants to 
treat depressive disorders.
Copyright 2009 Elsevier GmbH.
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2009.07.015
PMID: 19699627 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The antidepressant-like effects of Aloysia polystachya (Griseb.) Moldenke (Verbenaceae) in mice 1. Phytomedicine. 2008 Jun;15(6-7):478-83. doi: 10.1016/j.phymed.2007.11.018.
Epub  2008 Jan 28.

The antidepressant-like effects of Aloysia polystachya (Griseb.) Moldenke 
(Verbenaceae) in mice.

Hellión-Ibarrola MC(1)
 Ibarrola DA, Montalbetti Y, Kennedy ML, Heinichen O, 
Campuzano M, Ferro EA, Alvarenga N, Tortoriello J, De Lima TC, Mora S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Psychopharmacology, Department of Pharmacology, Facultad de 
Ciencias Químicas, Universidad Nacional de Asunción, Campus Universitario, P.O.
Box 1055, San Lorenzo, Paraguay.
chellion@qui.una.py

The aim of the present work is to evaluate the putative antidepressant-like 
effects of a hydro-ethanolic extract (CEAp) and their fractions from the aerial 
parts of Aloysia polystachya (Griseb.)
Moldenke (Verbenaceae) on the performance 
of male mice in the forced swimming test (FST).
A single dose (100.0mg/kgp.o.)
of CEAp, in male mice provoked a significant reduction of the immobility time 
(p<0.01).
Such effect was also observed with short-term treatment (7 days) with 
single doses of 1.0 (p<0.01), 10.0 (p<0.05) and 100.0 (p<0.05)mg/kg/day of CEAp.
Additionally, in a different set of experiments, repeated administration in a 
24-h period (24, 18 and 1h before swimming test) with doses of 1.0 (p<0.05) and 
10.0 (p<0.05)mg/kg p.o., of CEAp and 10.0mg/kgp.o., (p<0.05) of ethyl acetate 
fraction, provoked significant reduction of the immobility time of male mice in 
the FST.
Moreover, it was noted important differences in the onset of the 
antidepressant-like effect in the FST, depending on the modality of treatment 
with CEAp (acute, short-term or repeated).
Both, efficacy and potency were 
higher when repeated administration of CEAp was used, and surprisingly the dose 
of 10mg/kg (24, 18 and 1h before swimming test) was more effective than 
imipramine.
In the same way, the short term administration (7 days) improved 
significantly efficacy and potency of the CEAp in comparison to a single dose 
treatment.
The ethyl acetate fraction submitted to TLC demonstrated that main 
and minor components are phenolics and terpenes, respectively.
In addition, this 
fraction gives a negative Shinoda's test for flavonoids.
These results indicate 
an antidepressant-like profile of action for the hydro-ethanolic extract and the 
component(s) of the ethyl acetate fraction obtained from A. polystachya, which 
deserve further investigation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.phymed.2007.11.018
PMID: 18222666 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enhancement by progesterone of lysergic acid diethylamide inhibition of the copulatory response in the female rat 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1980 Apr 11;63(1):57-64. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(80)90116-8.

Enhancement by progesterone of lysergic acid diethylamide inhibition of the 
copulatory response in the female rat.

Sietnieks A
 Meyerson BJ.
Copulatory behavior in the ovariectomized rat, the lordosis response (L.R.)
was 
induced by either estrogen alone or estrogen followed by progesterone.
L.R.
has 
been shown to be inhibited dose-dependently by lysergic acid diethylamide (LSD).
The effects of various hormone treatments on the LSD-induced inhibition were 
tested in the present study.
Progesterone but not estrogen was found to 
significantly enhance the LSD effect in a dose-dependent manner.
In contrast, 
the effect of LSD on spontaneous behaviors in an exploratory situation was not 
influenced by progesterone treatment.
This phenomenon of increased L.R.
inhibitor effect by LSD was probably not due to a steroid-induced change in LSD 
metabolism.
The data show instead that progesterone specifically influences 
monoaminergic mechanisms, which are related to the action of LSD.
This has 
important implications for the possibility that progesterone induces the L.R.
by 
acting on monoaminergic mechanisms.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(80)90116-8
PMID: 7379849 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Of mind and morbidity: can stress and grief depress immunity? 1. JAMA. 1982 Jul 23;248(4):405-7.

Of mind and morbidity: can stress and grief depress immunity?

Macek C.

PMID: 7087134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Orotate as a β-Alanine Donor for Anserine and Carnosine Biosynthesis
 and Effects of Actinomycin D and Azauracil on Their Pathway 1.
J Biochem.
1969 Aug;66(2):123-32. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a129127.
Orotate as a beta-alanine donor for anserine and carnosine biosynthesis, and 
effects of actinomycin D and azauracil on their pathway.
Aonuma S, Hama T, Tamaki N, Okumura H.

DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a129127
PMID: 5394595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Localization of 5-HT2A receptors on dopamine cells in subnuclei of the midbrain A10 cell group 1. Neuroscience. 2002;111(1):163-76. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(01)00593-0.

Localization of 5-HT(2A) receptors on dopamine cells in subnuclei of the 
midbrain A10 cell group.

Nocjar C(1)
 Roth BL, Pehek EA.
Author information:
(1)Louis Stokes Cleveland VA Medical Center 151 (W), OH 44106, USA.
Considerable evidence suggests that a dysfunction of the dopamine and serotonin 
(5-hydroxytryptamine or 5-HT) neurotransmitter systems contributes to a diverse 
range of pathological conditions including schizophrenia, depression and drug 
abuse.
Recent electrophysiological and behavioral studies suggest that 5-HT 
modulates dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area via activation of 
5-HT(2A) receptors.
It is currently unknown if 5-HT(2A) receptors mediate their 
actions on dopaminergic neurons in the ventral tegmental area via direct or 
indirect mechanisms.
This study investigated whether 5-HT(2A) receptors were 
localized on dopamine cells within the A10 dopamine subnuclei of the rat, 
including the ventral tegmental area.
We discovered that 5-HT(2A) receptor-like 
immunoreactivity colocalized with tyrosine hydroxylase, a marker for dopamine 
neurons, throughout the A10 dopamine cell population.
Colocalization was most 
prominent in rostral and mid A10 regions, including the paranigral, 
parabrachial, and interfascicular subnuclei.
Though more rare, non-dopaminergic 
neurons also expressed 5-HT(2A) receptor immunoreactivity in the ventral 
tegmental area.
Additionally, although a dense population of 5-HT(2A) 
immunoreactive cells was observed in the rostral dorsal raphe nucleus, rarely 
were these cells immunoreactive for tyrosine hydroxylase.
The linear raphe A10 
dopamine subdivisions also displayed a low degree of 5-HT(2A) receptor and 
tyrosine hydroxylase colocalization.
These findings provide an anatomical basis 
for the physiological modulation of dopamine neurons in the rostral ventral 
tegmental area either directly, by 5-HT(2A) receptors localized on dopamine 
cells, or indirectly, through a non-dopaminergic mechanism.
Interestingly, 
5-HT(2A) receptors were expressed on dopamine neurons in several A10 subnuclei 
that project to mesolimbic forebrain regions implicated in drug addiction, and 
recent evidence indicates that ventral tegmental area 5-HT(2A) receptor 
activation may modulate reward-related behavior in rodents.
5-HT(2A) receptors 
were also expressed on dopamine cells in A10 subnuclei that project to forebrain 
areas that have been implicated in schizophrenia, and atypical antipsychotic 
drugs have high affinities for 5-HT(2A) receptors.
Thus, findings in this study 
could have important implications for understanding 5-HT and dopamine circuitry 
dysfunction in schizophrenia.
DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4522(01)00593-0
PMID: 11955720 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Trastuzumab emtansine for the treatment of HER2-positive metastatic
breast cancer 1. Drugs Today (Barc). 2013 Nov;49(11):701-15. doi:
10.1358/dot.2013.49.11.2020937.

Trastuzumab emtansine for the treatment of HER2-positive metastatic breast 
cancer.

Haddley K(1).

Author information:
(1)Liverpool
 U.K. scientific.prousjournals@thomsonreuters.com.
Trastuzumab emtansine is an antibody-drug conjugate comprised of the receptor 
tyrosine-protein kinase erbB-2 (HER2) antibody trastuzumab, and a derivative of 
the cytostatic agent maytansinoid DM1, covalently linked by a thiol linker.
The 
drug was developed in an attempt to overcome trastuzumab resistance in patients 
with HER2-positive breast carcinoma, but it is also of potential use in other 
HER2-positive cancers.
The preclinical antitumor activity of trastuzumab 
emtansine was established in HER2-positive breast cancer cell lines and murine 
xenograft models.
Preclinically, trastuzumab emtansine was efficacious in 
HER2-positive cells that were resistant to trastuzumab or lapatinib.
Clinically, 
the drug is well tolerated in most patients, with a predictable pharmacokinetic 
profile and minimal systemic exposure to free cytotoxic DM1.
Unlike with 
trastuzumab, cardiac toxicity has not been seen in patients receiving 
trastuzumab emtansine and less adverse events have been reported than with other 
chemotherapy regimens.
Results from a number of phase II studies and early 
results from a phase III investigation (EMILIA) demonstrated response rates of 
25-35% in patients with breast cancer who had previously received trastuzumab.
Several phase II and III studies are under way investigating trastuzumab 
emtansine in combination with other regimens in patients with HER2-positive 
cancers.
Copyright 2013 Prous Science, S.A.U.
or its licensors.
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1358/dot.2013.49.11.2020937
PMID: 24308017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cerebromicrocirculatory defects in animal model of depression 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1984;84(2):196-9. doi: 10.1007/BF00427445.

Cerebromicrocirculatory defects in animal model of depression.

Preskorn SH
 Kent TA, Glotzbach RK, Irwin GH, Solnick JV.
In the tetrabenazine (TBZ) model of depression, the cerebromicrocirculation was 
discovered to respond abnormally to metabolic demand as mimicked by the 
administration of CO2.
Altered responsivity of cerebral blood flow and effective 
permeability of the blood--brain barrier to changes in PaCO2 were found.
These 
physiologic defects coincided temporally with TBZ-induced depletion of central 
norepinephrine and dopamine and with the development of the behavioral effects 
of TBZ (the end points used to test the antidepressant potential of experimental 
drugs).
Pretreatment with amitriptyline (a standard antidepressant and amine 
reuptake inhibitor) prevented the development of these TBZ-induced abnormalities 
in the cerebromicrocirculation, just as it prevented the behavioral effects.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00427445
PMID: 6438678 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Revealing the role of the autonomic nervous system in the development and maintenance of Goldblatt hypertension in rats 1. Auton Neurosci. 2014 Jul;183(100):23-9. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2014.02.001.
Epub  2014 Feb 8.

Revealing the role of the autonomic nervous system in the development and 
maintenance of Goldblatt hypertension in rats.

Oliveira-Sales EB(1)
 Toward MA(2), Campos RR(3), Paton JF(4).
Author information:
(1)School of Physiology & Pharmacology, Medical Sciences Building, University of 
Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK; Department of Physiology, Federal University of 
Sao Paulo, UNIFESP, SP 04023-062, Brazil.
(2)School of Physiology & Pharmacology, Medical Sciences Building, University of 
Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.
(3)Department of Physiology, Federal University of Sao Paulo, UNIFESP, SP 
04023-062, Brazil.
(4)School of Physiology & Pharmacology, Medical Sciences Building, University of 
Bristol, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.
Electronic address: 
julian.f.r.paton@bristol.ac.uk.
Despite extensive use of the renovascular/Goldblatt model of hypertension-2K-1C, 
and the use of renal denervation to treat drug resistant hypertensive patients, 
autonomic mechanisms that underpin the maintenance of this hypertension are 
important yet remain unclear.
Our aim was to analyse cardiovascular autonomic 
function by power spectral density analysis of both arterial pressure and pulse 
interval measured continuously by radio telemetry for 6weeks after renal artery 
clipping.
Mean arterial pressure increased from 106±5 to 185±2mmHg during 5weeks 
post clipping when it stabilized.
A tachycardia developed during the 4th week, 
which plateaued between weeks 5 and 6.
The gain of the cardiac vagal baroreflex 
decreased immediately after clipping and continued to do so until the 5th week 
when it plateaued (from -2.4±0.09 to -0.8±0.04bpm/mmHg; P<0.05).
A similar time 
course of changes in the high frequency power spectral density of the pulse 
interval was observed (decrease from 13.4±0.6 to 8.3±0.01ms(2); P<0.05).
There 
was an increase in both the very low frequency and low frequency components of 
systolic blood pressure that occurred 3 and 4weeks after clipping, respectively.
Thus, we show for the first time the temporal profile of autonomic mechanisms 
underpinning the initiation, development and maintenance of renovascular 
hypertension including: an immediate depression of cardiac baroreflex gain 
followed by a delayed cardiac sympathetic predominance; elevated sympathetic 
vasomotor drive occurring after the initiation of the hypertension but 
coinciding during its mid-development and maintenance.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.autneu.2014.02.001
PMCID: PMC4079011
PMID: 24560525 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Environmental and chemical dissociation of antibody-dependent phagocytosis from lysis mediated by macrophages: Stimulation of lysis by sulfhydryl-blocking and esterase-inhibiting agents and depression by trypan blue and trypsin 1. Cell Immunol. 1980 Mar 1;50(1):94-105. doi: 10.1016/0008-8749(80)90009-x.

Environmental and chemical dissociation of antibody-dependent phagocytosis from 
lysis mediated by macrophages: stimulation of lysis by sulfhydryl-blocking and 
esterase-inhibiting agents and depression by trypan blue and trypsin.

Ralph P
 Nakoinz I.

DOI: 10.1016/0008-8749(80)90009-x
PMID: 7397785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pre- and postsynaptic inhibition mediated by GABAB receptors in rat ventrolateral periaqueductal gray neurons 1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2003 Mar 7;302(2):233-7. doi: 
10.1016/s0006-291x(03)00156-6.

Pre- and postsynaptic inhibition mediated by GABA(B) receptors in rat 
ventrolateral periaqueductal gray neurons.

Yang K(1)
 Furue H, Kumamoto E, Dong YX, Yoshimura M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Integrative Physiology, Graduate School of Medical Sciences, 
Kyushu University, Fukuoka, Japan.
yankun@post.saga-med.ac.jp

The present study examined the actions of a GABA(B)-receptor agonist, baclofen, 
on synaptic transmission in rat ventrolateral periaqueductal gray (PAG) neurons 
of brainstem slices by using whole-cell voltage-clamp recordings.
Baclofen (10 
microM) induced a slow outward current (peak amplitude: 30.1+/-3.1pA, n=13) at 
-70mV, which persisted in the presence of tetrodotoxin (0.5 microM) and was 
diminished in the presence of postsynaptic intracellular K(+)-channel blockers 
(Cs(+) and TEA) and GDP-beta-S, indicating a direct postsynaptic depression 
mediated by K(+) channels and G proteins.
Baclofen (10 microM) also decreased 
the frequency of both glutamatergic spontaneous EPSC (by 36+/-7%, n=11) and 
GABAergic spontaneous IPSC (by 37+/-12%, n=6) without changes in their 
amplitudes, indicating its presynaptic inhibitions.
Taken together, the 
activation of postsynaptic GABA(B) receptors inhibits ventrolateral PAG neurons 
directly.
At the same time, activating presynaptic GABA(B) receptors on 
glutamatergic and GABAergic nerve terminals inhibits glutamate and GABA release, 
respectively.
The overall effects might influence an output of ventrolateral PAG 
neurons that build up the descending pain control system to the spinal dorsal 
horn.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-291x(03)00156-6
PMID: 12604336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of d-penicillamine and N-acetyl-d
 l-penicillamine treatment on distribution of inorganic and chlormerodrin mercury in rats.
1.
J Nucl Biol Med.
1970 Oct-Dec;14(4):145-9.
Effects of d-penicillamine and N-acetyl-d, l-penicillamine treatment on 
distribution of inorganic and chlormerodrin mercury in rats.
Kawin B, Winters EE.
PMID: 5521070 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
An RNA synthesis inhibition assay for detecting toxic substances using click chemistry 1. J Toxicol Sci. 2014 Apr;39(2):293-9. doi: 10.2131/jts.39.293.

An RNA synthesis inhibition assay for detecting toxic substances using click 
chemistry.

Kametani Y(1)
 Iwai S, Kuraoka I.
Author information:
(1)Division of Chemistry, Graduate School of Engineering Science, Osaka 
University.
Biological risk assessment studies of chemical substances that induce DNA 
lesions have been primarily based on the action of DNA polymerases during 
replication.
However, DNA lesions interfere not only with replication, but also 
with transcription.
There is no simple method for the detection of the DNA 
lesion-induced inhibition of transcription.
Here, we report an assay for 
estimating the toxicity of chemical substances by visualizing transcription in 
mammalian cells using nucleotide analog 5-ethynyluridine (EU) and its click 
chemistry reaction.
Ultraviolet light and representative chemical substances 
(camptothecin, 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide, mitomycin C, and cisplatin, but not 
etoposide) of DNA- damaging agents show toxicity, as indicated by RNA synthesis 
inhibition in response to DNA damage in HeLa cells.
Using titanium dioxide, we 
observed RNA synthesis inhibition in response to the rutile form, but not the 
anatase form, indicating that rutile titanium dioxide is a toxic substance.
Because this method is based on the transcriptional response to DNA lesions, we 
can use terminally differentiated neuron-like PC12 cells, the differentiation of 
which can be induced by nerve growth factors, for evaluating chemical 
substances.
Ultraviolet light and some chemicals (camptothecin, 
4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide, mitomycin C, and cisplatin, but not etoposide) 
inhibited RNA synthesis in non-differentiated PC12 cells.
Conversely, 
camptothecin and cisplatin did not inhibit RNA synthesis in differentiated PC12 
cells, but 4-nitroquinoline-1-oxide, mitomycin C, and etoposide did.
And using 
titanium dioxide, we did not observed any RNA synthesis inhibition.
These data 
suggest that this method might be used to estimate the potential risk of 
chemical substances in differentiated mammalian cells, which are the most common 
cell type found in the human body.
DOI: 10.2131/jts.39.293
PMID: 24646711 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Aflatoxin-Antioxidant Effects on Growth of Young Chicks 1. Poult Sci. 1985 Dec;64(12):2287-91. doi: 10.3382/ps.0642287.

Aflatoxin-antioxidant effects on growth of young chicks.

Larsen C
 Ehrich M, Driscoll C, Gross WB.
Butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT), an antioxidant, was provided to chicks at 8 X, 
30 X and 80 X the normal concentrations in their feed beginning at 1 day of age 
and continuing for the next 6 weeks.
The ability of these birds to resist the 
adverse effects of dietary aflatoxin (3000 ppb, beginning Day 8) was measured by 
weight gain and feed efficiency over the 6-week period of study.
Birds on 
aflatoxin-contaminated feed did not gain weight as rapidly or as efficiently as 
birds on uncontaminated feed.
Depression of growth caused by aflatoxin was 
significantly less in birds given BHT than in those fed the diet not containing 
antioxidant.
DOI: 10.3382/ps.0642287
PMID: 4095064 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Augmentation of Behavior Therapy With           <scp>d</scp>           -Cycloserine for Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder 1. Am J Psychiatry. 2008 Mar;165(3):335-41; quiz 409. doi: 
10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.07050776. Epub 2008 Feb 1.

Augmentation of behavior therapy with D-cycloserine for obsessive-compulsive 
disorder.

Wilhelm S(1)
 Buhlmann U, Tolin DF, Meunier SA, Pearlson GD, Reese HE, 
Cannistraro P, Jenike MA, Rauch SL.
Author information:
(1)Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder Clinic, Department of Psychiatry, Massachusetts 
General Hospital, Boston, MA 02114, USA.
wilhelm@psych.mgh.harvard.edu

Comment in
    Am J Psychiatry.
2008 Mar;165(3):293-6. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.07121871.
Am J Psychiatry.
2008 Aug;165(8):1050. doi: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2008.08030455.
OBJECTIVE: This study examined whether d-cycloserine, a partial agonist at the 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) glutamatergic receptor, enhances the efficacy of 
behavior therapy for obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
METHOD: A randomized, double-blind, placebo-controlled trial investigating 
D-cycloserine versus placebo augmentation of behavior therapy was conducted in 
23 OCD patients.
Patients first underwent a diagnostic interview and 
pretreatment evaluation, followed by a psychoeducational/treatment planning 
session.
Then they received 10 behavior therapy sessions.
Treatment sessions 
were conducted twice per week.
One hour before each of the behavior therapy 
sessions, the participants received either D-cycloserine, 100 mg, or a placebo.
RESULTS: Relative to the placebo group, the D-cycloserine group's OCD symptoms 
were significantly more improved at mid-treatment, and the D-cycloserine group's 
depressive symptoms were significantly more improved at posttreatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These data provide support for the use of D-cycloserine as an 
augmentation of behavior therapy for OCD and extend findings in animals and 
other human disorders suggesting that behavior therapy acts by way of long-term 
potentiation of glutamatergic pathways and that the effects of behavior therapy 
are potentiated by an NMDA agonist.
DOI: 10.1176/appi.ajp.2007.07050776
PMID: 18245177 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Preclinical research strategies for newly approved drugs as reflected in early publication patterns 1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 2016 Feb;389(2):187-99. doi: 
10.1007/s00210-015-1187-1. Epub 2015 Nov 26.

Preclinical research strategies for newly approved drugs as reflected in early 
publication patterns.

Köster U(1)
 Nolte I(1), Michel MC(2)(3).
Author information:
(1)Klinik für Kleintiere, Tierärztliche Hochschule Hannover, Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Translational Medicine and Clinical Pharmacology, Boehringer 
Ingelheim Pharma GmbH & Co KG, Ingelheim, Germany.
marmiche@uni-mainz.de.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Johannes Gutenberg University, Obere Zahlbacher 
Str.
67, 51101, Mainz, Germany.
marmiche@uni-mainz.de.
The present study aimed to explore early publication patterns (i.e.
up to 1 year 
after obtaining regulatory approval) for newly registered drugs.
From the 
website of the US Food and Drug Administration, all newly approved drugs for 6 
calendar years between 1991 and 2011 were identified.
Non-clinical original 
publications for these compounds were retrieved from PubMed and their abstracts 
analysed for type of study and reported data.
This yielded 170 compounds for 
which 1954 original non-clinical publications were identified, i.e.
a 
median/mean of 5/11.5 publications per compound; however, number of publications 
per compound varied widely (0-90) and this variation exhibited a non-Gaussian 
distribution.
The earliest non-clinical publication typically was published less 
than 5 years before regulatory approval and more than 5 years after filing of 
the primary patent, but some compounds exhibited notable deviations from this 
pattern.
Publications most often reported on efficacy related to the target 
indication and on potential future indications, with fewer studies addressing 
mechanisms of action, potency, selectivity, pharmacokinetics and toxic effects.
For most compounds, data at the cellular and in vivo level were published, with 
fewer reports on effects on isolated tissues and even fewer at the molecular 
level.
The preferred species for cellular studies was human, whereas for in vivo 
studies, it was rats and mice.
In 75 % of cases, the lead author of the 
publication came from an academic institution, and most studies were published 
in classic pharmacology journals.
We conclude that number, timing and scope of 
early non-clinical publications on newly approved drugs exhibit major variance.
Factors potentially associated with such variance are explored in a companion 
paper.
DOI: 10.1007/s00210-015-1187-1
PMID: 26612507 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Nicotine-induced conditioned place preference and conditioned place aversion in mice 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1995 Jun-Jul;51(2-3):457-61. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(95)00007-j.

Nicotine-induced conditioned place preference and conditioned place aversion in 
mice.

Risinger FO(1)
 Oakes RA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Psychology, Oregon Health Sciences University, Portland 
97201-3098, USA.
The motivational effects of nicotine were examined in mice using an unbiased 
place conditioning design.
Swiss-Webster mice received four 15-min parings of a 
tactile stimulus with different doses of nicotine (0.25-2.0 mg/kg, IP).
A 
different tactile stimulus was paired with saline injections.
During 
conditioning, nicotine produced locomotor depression at the 2.0-mg/kg dose, with 
the greatest reduction in activity occurring during the latter part of each 
nicotine conditioning session.
After four trials, nicotine produced increases in 
locomotor activity during the initial part of the nicotine sessions at doses 0.5 
mg/kg or above.
Upon testing, nicotine-induced conditioned place preference was 
noted in mice receiving 0.5 mg/kg nicotine.
Conditioned place aversion was noted 
in mice receiving 2.0 mg/kg nicotine whereas doses of 0.25 and 1.0 mg/kg 
produced no conditioning.
These results indicate that nicotine has 
dose-dependent rewarding and aversive effects measured in an unbiased place 
conditioning paradigm using mice.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(95)00007-j
PMID: 7667368 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Orexinergic signaling mediates light-induced neuronal activation in the dorsal raphe nucleus 1. Neuroscience. 2012 Sep 18;220:201-7. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.06.020. 
Epub 2012 Jun 16.

Orexinergic signaling mediates light-induced neuronal activation in the dorsal 
raphe nucleus.

Adidharma W(1)
 Leach G, Yan L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, MI 48824, 
USA.
Seasonal affective disorder (SAD), a major depressive disorder recurring in the 
fall and winter, is caused by the reduction of light in the environment, and its 
depressive symptoms can be alleviated by bright light therapy.
Both circadian 
and monoaminergic systems have been implicated in the etiology of SAD.
However, 
the underlying neural pathways through which light regulates mood are not well 
understood.
The present study utilized a diurnal rodent model, Arvicanthis 
niloticus, to explore the neural pathways mediating the effects of light on 
brain regions involved in mood regulation.
Animals kept in constant darkness 
received light exposure in early subjective day, the time when light therapy is 
usually applied.
The time course of neural activity following light exposure was 
assessed using Fos protein as a marker in the following brain regions/cells: the 
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), orexin neurons in the perifornical-lateral 
hypothalamic area (PF-LHA) and the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN).
A light-induced 
increase in Fos expression was observed in orexin neurons and the DRN, but not 
in the SCN.
As the DRN is densely innervated by orexinergic inputs, the 
involvement of orexinergic signaling in mediating the effects of light on the 
DRN was tested in the second experiment.
The animals were injected with the 
selective orexin receptor type 1 (OXR1) antagonist SB-334867 prior to the light 
exposure.
The treatment of SB-334867 significantly inhibited the Fos induction 
in the DRN.
The results collectively point to the role of orexin neurons in 
mediating the effects of light on the mood-regulating monoaminergic areas, 
suggesting an orexinergic pathway that underlies light-dependent mood 
fluctuation and the beneficial effects of light therapy.
Copyright © 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.06.020
PMCID: PMC3412924
PMID: 22710065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Indolealkylamines and behavior. Introductory remarks. 1. Adv Pharmacol (1962). 1968;6(Pt B):209-11.

Indolealkylamines and behavior. Introductory remarks.

Perry WL.

PMID: 5658324 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Blockade of kappa opioid receptors attenuates the development of depressive-like behaviors induced by cocaine withdrawal in rats 1. Neuropharmacology. 2012 Jan;62(1):167-76. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.06.014.  Epub 2011 Jun 29.

Blockade of kappa opioid receptors attenuates the development of depressive-like 
behaviors induced by cocaine withdrawal in rats.

Chartoff E(1)
 Sawyer A, Rachlin A, Potter D, Pliakas A, Carlezon WA.
Author information:
(1)Behavioral Genetics Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry, Harvard Medical 
School, McLean Hospital, MRC 218, 115 Mill Street, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.
echartoff@mclean.harvard.edu

Drug dependence is characterized by dysregulation of brain reward systems and 
increased sensitivity to stress.
Chronic exposure to drugs of abuse is 
associated with increased expression of the neuropeptide dynorphin, the 
endogenous ligand for kappa opioid receptors (KORs).
Activation of KORs causes 
depressive- and aversive-like responses in rodents, raising the possibility that 
drug-induced upregulation of dynorphin plays a role independence-associated 
negative states.
Here we used "binge" exposure to cocaine (3 daily 
intraperitoneal injections of 15 mg/kg for 14 days) to examine the development 
of dependence-like behavior in the intracranial self-stimulation (ICSS) test and 
the forced swim test (FST).
When rats were tested 1 h before their first 
scheduled injection of each day-a period of drug withdrawal corresponding to 20 
h after their last injection on the previous day-there were exposure-dependent 
increases in ICSS thresholds (a putative indicator of anhedonia) and decreases 
in latencies to immobility in the FST (a putative indicator of behavioral 
despair).
Administration of the long-lasting KOR antagonist norBNI (20 μg, 
intracerebroventricular) before the beginning of the binge regimen attenuated 
the development of cocaine withdrawal-induced anhedonia in the ICSS test.
In 
contrast, administration of norBNI in the midst of the binge regimen had no 
effect on expression of cocaine withdrawal-induced anhedonia in the ICSS test, 
although it did attenuate despair-like behavior in the FST.
These data suggest 
that blockade of KORs before exposure to a stressor (in this case, cocaine 
withdrawal or forced swimming) can attenuate the development of stress-induced 
behavioral adaptations.
This article is part of a Special Issue entitled 
'Anxiety and Depression'.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.06.014
PMCID: PMC3195851
PMID: 21736885 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dose-dependent potentiation or inhibition by Ro4-4602 of 5-HTP hyperthermia in rabbits 1. J Pharm Pharmacol. 1974 Apr;26(4):278-9. doi: 
10.1111/j.2042-7158.1974.tb09273.x.

Dose-dependent potentiation or inhibition by Ro4-4602 of 5-HTP hyperthermia in 
rabbits.

Gardey-Levassort C
 Lechat P.

DOI: 10.1111/j.2042-7158.1974.tb09273.x
PMID: 4151387 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Extracellular acidosis and high levels of carbon dioxide suppress synaptic transmission and prevent the induction of long-term potentiation in the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices 1. Hippocampus. 1998;8(1):24-32. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1998)8:1<24::AID-HIPO3>3.0.CO;2-7.

Extracellular acidosis and high levels of carbon dioxide suppress synaptic 
transmission and prevent the induction of long-term potentiation in the CA1 
region of rat hippocampal slices.

Velísek L(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology
 Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, New York 
10461, USA.
velisek@aecom.yu.edu

Long-term potentiation (LTP) is a long-lasting increase in synaptic strength 
induced by high frequency stimulation.
LTP may participate in learning and 
memory formation.
In many synaptic systems, LTP is dependent on intact function 
of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors.
NMDA receptors may be inhibited in 
different conditions involving also extracellular acidosis.
A decrease in the 
extracellular pH accompanies many pathological states such as ischemia, hypoxia, 
and the CNS injury.
The study was designed to determine whether comparable 
extracellular acid-base imbalances are able to interfere with the LTP induction.
Hippocampal slices from adult rats were stimulated with high frequency 
stimulation (1 x 100 Hz/1 s) at Schaffer collateral-commissural synaptic system 
in the environment with different pH (6.7-7.8) and the field responses were 
recorded in CA1.
Acidosis was achieved by supplying excessive CO2 or by 
HCO3-decrease in standard bicarbonate-containing buffer or by a direct 
acidification of the buffer containing Na-HEPES.
Invariably, all forms of 
acidification suppressed the efficacy of normal, low frequency synaptic 
transmission and prevented the induction of LTP in a reversible manner; i.e., 
after reperfusion of the slices at pH 7.3 and restimulation, there was a return 
of synaptic transmission back to baseline, and a significant amount of LTP 
occurred.
In contrast, alkalization to pH 7.8, although enhancing synaptic 
transmission efficacy, did not further increase the LTP magnitude compared to 
control environment with pH 7.3.
The results suggest that extracellular acidosis 
associated with several pathological conditions in the CNS may significantly 
diminish the LTP induction, and thus negatively affect all physiological 
processes that utilize LTP.
DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1998)8:1<24::AID-HIPO3>3.0.CO;2-7
PMID: 9519884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Neurotropism of Highly Pathogenic Avian Influenza Virus A/Chicken/Indonesia/2003 (H5N1) in Experimentally Infected Pigeons (<i>Columbia livia f. domestica</i>) <jats:p> This investigation assessed the susceptibility of experimentally infected pigeons to the highly pathogenic avian influenza virus (HPAIV) H5N1 that caused recent outbreaks of avian influenza in birds and humans in several countries of Asia. For this purpose 14 pigeons were infected ocularly and nasally with 10<jats:sup>8</jats:sup> EID<jats:sub>50</jats:sub> and clinical signs were recorded and compared with five chickens infected simultaneously as positive controls. The chickens demonstrated anorexia
 depression, and 100% mortality within 2 days postinoculation.
Three of the pigeons died after a history of depression and severe neurological signs consisting of paresis to paralysis, mild enteric hemorrhage, resulting in a mortality of 21%.
Gross lesions in these pigeons were mild and inconsistent.
Occasionally subcutaneous hyperemia and hemorrhage and cerebral malacia were observed.
Microscopic lesions and detection of viral antigen were confined to the central nervous system of these pigeons.
In the cerebrum and to a minor extent in the brain stem a lymphohistiocytic meningoencephalitis with disseminated neuronal and glial cell necrosis, perivascular cuffing, glial nodules, and in one bird focally extensive liquefactive necrosis could be observed.
The remaining nine pigeons showed neither clinical signs nor gross or histological lesions associated with avian influenza, although seroconversion against H5 indicated that they had been infected.
These results confirm that pigeons are susceptible to HPAIV A/chicken/Indonesia/2003 (H5N1) and that the disease is associated with the neurotropism of this virus.
Although sentinel chickens and most pigeons did not develop disease, further experiments have to elucidate whether or not Columbiformes are involved in transmission and spread of highly pathogenic avian influenza.
</jats:p>
Cannabis and adolescent brain development 1. Pharmacol Ther. 2015 Apr;148:1-16. doi: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2014.11.009. Epub
 2014 Nov 20.

Cannabis and adolescent brain development.

Lubman DI(1)
 Cheetham A(2), Yücel M(3).
Author information:
(1)Turning Point, Eastern Health and Eastern Health Clinical School, Monash 
University, Victoria, Australia.
Electronic address: dan.lubman@monash.edu.
(2)Turning Point, Eastern Health and Eastern Health Clinical School, Monash 
University, Victoria, Australia.
(3)Melbourne Neuropsychiatry Centre, Department of Psychiatry, The University of 
Melbourne and Melbourne Health, Victoria, Australia; Monash Clinical & Imaging 
Neuroscience, School of Psychological Sciences, Monash University, Melbourne, 
Victoria, Australia.
Heavy cannabis use has been frequently associated with increased rates of mental 
illness and cognitive impairment, particularly amongst adolescent users.
However, the neurobiological processes that underlie these associations are 
still not well understood.
In this review, we discuss the findings of studies 
examining the acute and chronic effects of cannabis use on the brain, with a 
particular focus on the impact of commencing use during adolescence.
Accumulating evidence from both animal and human studies suggests that regular 
heavy use during this period is associated with more severe and persistent 
negative outcomes than use during adulthood, suggesting that the adolescent 
brain may be particularly vulnerable to the effects of cannabis exposure.
As the 
endocannabinoid system plays an important role in brain development, it is 
plausible that prolonged use during adolescence results in a disruption in the 
normative neuromaturational processes that occur during this period.
We identify 
synaptic pruning and white matter development as two processes that may be 
adversely impacted by cannabis exposure during adolescence.
Potentially, 
alterations in these processes may underlie the cognitive and emotional deficits 
that have been associated with regular use commencing during adolescence.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pharmthera.2014.11.009
PMID: 25460036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Behavioral and Biochemical Interaction Between Nicotine and Chronic Unpredictable Mild Stress in Mice 1. Mol Neurobiol. 2017 Mar;54(2):904-921. doi: 10.1007/s12035-016-9701-0. Epub
2016  Jan 18.

Behavioral and Biochemical Interaction Between Nicotine and Chronic 
Unpredictable Mild Stress in Mice.

Biala G(1)
 Pekala K(2), Boguszewska-Czubara A(3), Michalak A(2), Kruk-Slomka 
M(2), Budzynska B(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacodynamics, Medical University of 
Lublin, Chodzki 4A Street, 20-093, Lublin, Poland.
grazyna.biala@umlub.pl.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Pharmacodynamics, Medical University of 
Lublin, Chodzki 4A Street, 20-093, Lublin, Poland.
(3)Department of Medical Chemistry, Medical University of Lublin, Chodzki 4A 
Street, 20-093, Lublin, Poland.
Nicotine, the main component of tobacco smoke, exerts influence on mood, and 
contributes to physical and psychological dependence.
Taking into account 
frequent concomitance of nicotine abuse and stress, we aimed to research 
behavioral and biochemical effects associated with nicotine administration in 
combination with chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS).
Mice were submitted 
to the procedure of CUMS for 4 weeks, 2 h per day.
Our results revealed that 
CUMS-exposed animals exhibited behavioral alteration like anxiety disorders in 
the elevated plus maze (EPM) test, the disturbances in memory in the passive 
avoidance (PA) test and depressive effects in the forced swim test (FST).
Moreover, nicotine (0.05-0.5 mg/kg), after an acute or subchronic administration 
decreased stress-induced depression- and anxiety-like effect as well as memory 
deficit.
Administration of metyrapone (50 mg/kg), a glucocorticosteroid 
antagonist, alleviated the depressive effect induced by the CUMS.
The 
biochemical experiments showed decreased values of the total antioxidant status 
(TAS), activities of superoxide dismutase (SOD) and glutathione peroxidase (GPx) 
with simultaneously increased in malondialdehyde (MDA) concentration in mice 
submitted to the CUMS.
The same effects were observed after an acute and 
subchronic nicotine administration within all examined brain structures (i.e., 
hippocampus, cortex, and cerebellum) and in the whole brain in non-stressed and 
stressed mice confirming pro-oxidative effect of nicotine.
Our study contributes 
to the understanding of behavioral and biochemical mechanisms involved in 
stress-induced disorders such as depression, anxiety and memory disturbances as 
well as dual nicotine-stress interactions on the basis of the development of 
nicotine dependence.
DOI: 10.1007/s12035-016-9701-0
PMCID: PMC5310564
PMID: 26780460 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: CONFLICT OF INTEREST: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.
RESEARCH INVOLVING ANIMALS: All experiments 
were conducted according to the National Institute of Health Guidelines for the 
Care and Use of Laboratory Animals and to the European Community Council 
Directive for the Care and Use of Laboratory Animals of 24 November 1986 
(86/609/EEC).
The protocol was approved by the Committee on the Ethics of Animal 
Experiments of the Medical University of Lublin (Permit Number: 43/2013).
All 
efforts were made to minimize animal suffering and to reduce the number of 
animals used.
FUNDINGS: This work was supported by the Statutory Funds of the 
Medical University of Lublin (DS 23), and received no special grant from any 
funding agency in the public, commercial, or not-for-profit sectors.
The funders 
had no role in study design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, 
or preparation of the manuscript.
A neuronal substrate for a state‐dependent modulation of sensory inputs in the brainstem <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Central networks modulate sensory transmission during motor behavior. Sensory inputs may thus have distinct impacts according to the state of activity of the central networks. Using an <jats:italic>in‐vitro</jats:italic> isolated lamprey brainstem preparation
 we investigated whether a brainstem locomotor center, the mesencephalic locomotor region (MLR), modulates sensory transmission.
The synaptic responses of brainstem reticulospinal (RS) cells to electrical stimulation of the sensory trigeminal nerve were recorded before and after electrical stimulation of the MLR.
The RS cell synaptic responses were significantly reduced by MLR stimulation and the reduction of the response increased with the stimulation intensity of the MLR.
Bath perfusion of atropine prevented the depression of sensory transmission, indicating that muscarinic receptor activation is involved.
Previous studies have shown that, upon stimulation of the MLR, behavioral activity switches from a resting state to an active‐locomotor state.
Therefore, our results suggest that a state‐dependent modulation of sensory transmission to RS cells occurs in the behavioral context of locomotion and that muscarinic inputs from the MLR are involved.</jats:p>
Tolerance to the effects of ? 9-tetrahydrocannabinol in mice on intestinal motility
 temperature and locomotor activity 1.
Psychopharmacologia.
1975 Jul 23;43(1):31-6. doi: 10.1007/BF00437611.
Tolerance to the effect of delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol in mice on intestinal 
motility, temperature and locomotor activity.
Anderson PF, Jackson DM, Chesher GB, Malor R.

The onset and duration of tolerance to three effects of 
delta9-tetrahydrocannabinol (delta9-THC) given orally to mice were compared.
The 
effects of delta9-THC studied were: hypothermia, the depression of intestinal 
motility and the effect on spontaneous locomotor activity.
When mice were dosed 
and tested at 24 hrs intervals it was apparent that tolerance was complete to 
its hypothermic and locomotor depressant effects after the first doses and to 
depression of intestinal motility after the fourth dose.
Duration of tolerance 
also differed so that the normal hypothermic response had returned after 12 
dose-free days, but not after 5 drug-free days; the effect on locomotor activity 
had returned within 4 days; and apparent partial tolerance to the depressant 
effect of an acute challenging dose of delta9-THC on intestinal motility still 
existed after 19 dose-free days.
It is apparent that the time of onset and the 
duration of tolerance to delta9-THC in mice showed a different pattern in the 
three parameters studied.
It seems unlikely therefore that any one mechanism, 
such as metabolic tolerance, explains all the results observed and that several 
mechanisms should be explored to explain the phenomenon of tolerance to 
delta9-THC.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00437611
PMID: 1161992 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of D-aspartate uptake in rat cerebral cortex slices by hydrazines. SAM-TR-67-115. 1. Tech Rep SAM-TR. 1967 Jul:1-5.

Inhibition of D-aspartate uptake in rat cerebral cortex slices by hydrazines. 
SAM-TR-67-115.

Medina MA.

PMID: 5301196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
ARGON
 XENON, HYDROGEN, AND THE OXYGEN CONSUMPTION AND GLYCOLYSIS OF MOUSE TISSUE SLICES <jats:p>The effects of xenon, argon, and hydrogen on the aerobic and anaerobic metabolism of mouse liver, brain, and sarcoma slices have been investigated.
Xenon was found to alter the rates of metabolism of these tissues in a manner almost identical with helium.
The gas increased the rate of oxygen consumption in all three tissues and significantly depressed that of anaerobic glycolysis in brain and liver.
The depression of glycolysis in sarcoma was less pronounced and not highly significant.</jats:p>
               <jats:p>Although both the magnitude and statistical significance of the effects observed with argon were much smaller, there was a seeming adherence to the general pattern established by xenon and helium.
Hydrogen while remaining essentially ineffective insofar as oxygen uptake was concerned, depressed glycolysis in both liver and brain slices but did not significantly affect sarcoma slices.</jats:p>
               <jats:p>The following points are stressed in the Discussion: (1) the magnitude and direction of effects exerted by helium, argon, xenon, hydrogen, and nitrogen do not conform with the relative values of molecular weight, density, and solubility of these gases; (2) the effect of these gases on tissue metabolism does not necessarily parallel that exerted upon the whole organism.</jats:p>
Oral administration of monensin and lead to broiler chicks: effects on haematological and biochemical parameters. 1. Acta Vet Hung. 1994;42(1):111-20.

Oral administration of monensin and lead to broiler chicks: effects on 
haematological and biochemical parameters.

Khan MZ(1)
 Szarek J, Koncicki A, Krasnodebska-Depta A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Forensic Veterinary Medicine, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Agriculture and Technology, Olsztyn, Poland.
Monensin and lead were administered separately or concurrently at different 
toxic doses to broiler chicks.
Administration of lead alone did not result in a 
significant depression of haematological parameters.
Administration of higher 
levels of monensin caused a reduction in haematocrit and an increase in blood 
serum levels of alanine aminotransferase, aspartate aminotransferase and 
cholesterol.
Concurrent administration of monensin and lead caused a severe 
depression of haematological profiles which indicated the existence of an 
interaction between the two substances.
It was concluded that concurrent 
administration of monensin and lead potentiated the toxic effects of each other.
PMID: 7810394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Isoflavones and Soybeans Fermented with<i>Bacillus subtilis</i>on Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Production of Tumor Necrosis Factor-α and Fibrinolysis<i>In Vivo</i> 1. Immunopharmacol Immunotoxicol. 2007;29(2):323-33. doi: 
10.1080/08923970701513526.

Effects of isoflavones and soybeans fermented with Bacillus subtilis on 
lipopolysaccharide-induced production of tumor necrosis factor-alpha and 
fibrinolysis in vivo.

Hasumuma R(1)
 Kawaguchi K, Kikuchi S, Sugiyama T, Kumazawa Y.
Author information:
(1)Department of Biosciences, School of Science and Graduate School of 
Fundamental Life Science, Kitasato University, Sagamihara, Japan.
The effects of isoflavones and of a derivative of soybeans fermented with 
Bacillus subtilis, designated Nattoesse, on the lipopolysaccharide (LPS)-induced 
production of tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) and fibrinolysis were 
investigated in vivo.
The dietary supplement Nattoesse contains several 
isoflavones.
Therefore, we examined the effects of individual isoflavones 
(daidzein, daidzin, genistein, and genistin) on the LPS-induced production of 
TNF-alpha.
Intraperitoneal injections of daidzein, daidzin, and genistin (but 
not of genistein before a challenge with LPS) resulted in significant depression 
of serum levels of TNF-alpha in mice.
Daidzein had the strongest activity in 
this assay.
Oral administration of daidzein to mice also had a significant 
suppressive effect, as compared with that of the Citrus flavanone naringin.
In 
galactosamine-sensitized mice, by contrast, the suppression of LPS-induced 
lethal shock by daidzein was very weak.
Nattoesse did not inhibit the production 
of TNF-alpha nor did it prevent lethal shock.
However, oral administration of 
Nattoesse to mice significantly suppressed LPS-induced increases in scores of 
the fibrin degradation product, and the effect was both dose- and 
time-dependent.
Thus, it appears that Nattoesse has fibrinolytic activity during 
LPS-induced circulatory failure.
DOI: 10.1080/08923970701513526
PMID: 17849275 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Low Osmolality Contrast Media and Metabolic Changes in the Myocardium During Free and Reduced Coronary Flow in the Dog 1. Invest Radiol. 1990 Feb;25(2):127-32. doi: 10.1097/00004424-199002000-00005.

Low osmolality contrast media and metabolic changes in the myocardium during 
free and reduced coronary flow in the dog.

Kløw NE(1)
 Hevrøy O, Mortensen E, Dale K, Mjøs OD.
Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Tromsø, Norway.
The authors assessed whether intracoronary injection of low osmolality contrast 
media induces metabolic and electrocardiographic changes consistent with 
myocardial ischemia in anesthetized dogs.
Ioxaglate and iohexol were injected 
into the left main coronary artery (eight dogs) and into a carotid-coronary 
artery shunt (eight dogs), during free coronary flow and during 50% flow 
reduction.
Blood samples were obtained simultaneously from a femoral artery and 
from a small cardiac vein draining the contrast perfused area.
Contrast media 
had no immediate or late effects on lactate balance during free or reduced flow.
Early depression of the ST segment in epicardial ECG did not reflect ischemia.
The authors conclude that the two low-osmolality contrast media, iohexol and 
ioxaglate, did not induce ischemic changes in the myocardium.
DOI: 10.1097/00004424-199002000-00005
PMID: 2312248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of the Viscosity or Deacetylation Degree of Chitosan on Fecal Fat Excreted from Rats Fed on a High-fat Diet 1. Biosci Biotechnol Biochem. 1995 May;59(5):781-5. doi: 10.1271/bbb.59.781.

Effect of the viscosity or deacetylation degree of chitosan on fecal fat 
excreted from rats fed on a high-fat diet.

Deuchi K(1)
 Kanauchi O, Imasato Y, Kobayashi E.

Author information:
(1)Applied Bioresearch Center, Kirin Brewery Co. Ltd., Gunma, Japan.
Several chitosan preparations, either with a comparable degree of deacetylation 
but differing viscosity or with comparable viscosity but a differing degree of 
deacetylation, were examined for their effect on the fecal fat excreted from 
rats fed on a high-fat diet.
As the viscosity or deacetylation degree of a 
chitosan preparation increased, the more its effect on the apparent fat 
digestibility by rats became conspicuous.
A supplement of ascorbic acid to each 
chitosan diets resulted in a significant depression of fat digestion and 
absorption in the lumen.
The chitosan intake caused a higher level of fat to be 
excreted in the feces of the corn oil-receiving rats than the lard-receiving 
ones, although the effect was strong with both diet groups.
DOI: 10.1271/bbb.59.781
PMID: 7787292 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
SNAP-29-mediated Modulation of Synaptic Transmission in CulturedHippocampalNeurons 1. J Biol Chem. 2005 Jul 8;280(27):25769-79. doi: 10.1074/jbc.M502356200. Epub
2005  May 12.

SNAP-29-mediated modulation of synaptic transmission in cultured hippocampal 
neurons.

Pan PY(1)
 Cai Q, Lin L, Lu PH, Duan S, Sheng ZH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurobiology, Shanghai Second Medical University, 280 Chong 
Qing Nan Road, 200025 Shanghai, China.
Identifying the molecules that regulate both the recycling of synaptic vesicles 
and the SNARE components required for fusion is critical for elucidating the 
molecular mechanisms underlying synaptic plasticity.
SNAP-29 was initially 
isolated as a syntaxin-binding and ubiquitously expressed protein.
Previous 
studies have suggested that SNAP-29 inhibits SNARE complex disassembly, thereby 
reducing synaptic transmission in cultured superior cervical ganglion neurons in 
an activity-dependent manner.
However, the role of SNAP-29 in regulating 
synaptic vesicle recycling and short-term plasticity in the central nervous 
system remains unclear.
In the present study, we examined the effect of SNAP-29 
on synaptic transmission in cultured hippocampal neurons by dual patch clamp 
whole-cell recording, FM dye imaging, and immunocytochemistry.
Our results 
demonstrated that exogenous expression of SNAP-29 in presynaptic neurons 
significantly decreased the efficiency of synaptic transmission after repetitive 
firing within a few minutes under low and moderate frequency stimulations (0.1 
and 1 Hz).
In contrast, SNAP-29 did not affect the density of synapses and basal 
synaptic transmission.
Whereas neurotransmitter release was unaffected during 
intensive stimulation, recovery after synaptic depression was impaired by 
SNAP-29.
Furthermore, knockdown of SNAP-29 expression in neurons by small 
interfering RNA increased the efficiency of synaptic transmission during 
repetitive firing.
These findings suggest that SNAP-29 acts as a negative 
modulator for neurotransmitter release, probably by slowing recycling of the 
SNARE-based fusion machinery and synaptic vesicle turnover.
DOI: 10.1074/jbc.M502356200
PMCID: PMC1864940
PMID: 15890653 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of lithium chloride on the excitability of the subcortical structures of the rabbit brain]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1978 May-Jun;41(3):261-3.

[Effect of lithium chloride on the excitability of the subcortical structures of 
the rabbit brain].

[Article in Russian]

Saratikov AS
 Alekseeva LP, Agarkova VP, Naĭdenova MI.
Lithium chloride microinjections in doses of 100 mkg/mkl into the brain 
structures of rabbits produce a depressive effect on the subcortical formations.
The drug brings down the excitability of the hippocampus, caudate nucleus, 
mesencephalic reticular formations, thalamus and hypothalamus, raising the 
excitability of the amygdalae.
PMID: 658370 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The effect of stimulation of the adrenergic receptors on the frequency depression of the temporal parameters of the action potential in the right atrium of rats]. 1. Ross Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova. 1999 Apr;85(4):554-60.

[The effect of stimulation of the adrenergic receptors on the frequency 
depression of the temporal parameters of the action potential in the right 
atrium of rats].

[Article in Russian]

Petrashevskaia NN(1)
 Malykhina AP, Sidorov AV, Lobanok LM.
Author information:
(1)Belorussian State University, Minsk, Belorussia.
At a stimulation rate of 1 Hz, activation of alpha-adrenoreceptors prolonged the 
AP duration at 10%, 50%, and 90% repolarisation at 10(-7), 10(-6) M in the rat 
isolated right atria, but shortened it at a higher concentration of 10(-5) M. 
The frequency-induced depression of the AP duration became more evident in 
cardiomyocytes stimulated by 10(-7), 10(-6) M and less obvious at 10(-5) M of 
alpha-adrenoagonist.
Activation of alpha-adrenoreceptors by isoprenalin 
shortened the AP duration and enhanced the stimulation-rate-dependent changes in 
the atrial AP configuration.
PMID: 10513390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Efficacy of a long‐acting C‐peptide analogue against peripheral neuropathy in streptozotocin‐diabetic mice <jats:sec><jats:title>Aims</jats:title><jats:p>To investigate the efficacy of a pegylated <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content>eg‐<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide) against indices of peripheral neuropathy in a mouse model of type 1 diabetes and to compare efficacy of this <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide analogue against that of the native molecule.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Methods</jats:title><jats:p><jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C57Bl</jats:styled-content>/6 mice were injected with two consecutive doses of streptozotocin (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">STZ</jats:styled-content>) to induce type 1 diabetes. Mice were treated twice daily with native <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide [0.4–1.3 mg/kg subcutaneously (s.c.)] or twice weekly with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content>eg‐<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide (0.1–1.3 mg/kg s.c.) for 20 weeks. Motor and sensory nerve conduction velocities
 thermal and tactile responses and rate dependent <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">H</jats:styled-content>‐wave depression were assessed after 20 weeks of diabetes.
Foot skin intraepidermal fibres and corneal nerves were counted, and sciatic nerve substance <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content> and plasma <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide levels were also determined.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p>After 5 months of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">STZ</jats:styled-content>‐induced diabetes, mice exhibited significant motor and sensory nerve conduction slowing, thermal hypoalgesia, tactile allodynia and attenuation of rate‐dependent depression of the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">H</jats:styled-content> reflex.
These functional disorders were accompanied by nerve substance <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content> depletion but not loss of small sensory fibres in the hind paw epidermis or the cornea.
The efficacy of twice‐daily treatment with native <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide in preventing these disorders was matched or exceeded by twice‐weekly treatment with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content>eg‐<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide.
Both native and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content>eg‐<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide also increased corneal nerve occupancy in the sub‐basal nerve plexus of control rats.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title><jats:p>These data identify actions of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide against novel and clinically pertinent aspects of diabetic neuropathy in mice and also establish <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content>eg‐<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>‐peptide as a long‐acting therapeutic method of potential clinical value.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Changes in intestinal and hepatic thyroid hormone deiodination during spontaneous metamorphosis of the sea lamprey
Petromyzon marinus 1.
J Exp Zool.
2000 Feb 15;286(3):305-12. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1097-010x(20000215)286:3<305::aid-jez9>3.0.co;2-5.
Changes in intestinal and hepatic thyroid hormone deiodination during 
spontaneous metamorphosis of the sea lamprey, Petromyzon marinus.
Eales JG(1), McLeese JM, Holmes JA, Youson JH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Manitoba, R3T 2N2, 
Canada.
ealesjg@ms.umanitoba.ca

We measured microsomal low-K(m) outer-ring deiodination (ORD) and inner-ring 
deiodination (IRD) activities for thyroxine (T(4)) and 3, 5,3'-triiodothyronine 
(T(3)) in intestine and liver in nonmetamorphosing (undersized) larvae, 
immediately premetamorphic larvae, animals in stages 1-7 of metamorphosis, and 
immediately postmetamorphic sea lampreys (Petromyzon marinus).
For intestine: 
T(4)ORD activity was relatively low in nonmetamorphosing larvae, increased in 
premetamorphic individuals, was highest in stages 1 and 2 and was very low 
during stages 3-7; T(4)IRD activity was negligible until stage 3 but increased 
4.7-fold through stages 3 to 7 such that T(4)IRD activity was 14 times T(4)ORD 
activity at stage 6; T(3)ORD activity was undetectable; T(3)IRD activity was not 
measured through stages 3-7 but correlated with T(4)IRD activity at other 
stages.
For liver: deiodination was only measured up to stage 2 and in 
postmetamorphic animals; in contrast to intestine, T(4)ORD activity fell to low 
levels at stage 2 and was low during postmetamorphosis; T(4)IRD and T(3)IRD 
activities were very low and uninfluenced by developmental stage; T(3)ORD 
activity was undetectable.
We conclude that (1) deiodination activity is usually 
much higher in intestine than in liver, (2) intestinal ORD and IRD activities 
change reciprocally so that ORD predominates in early metamorphosis but IRD 
predominates in mid and late metamorphosis, and (3) changes in intestinal 
deiodination may contribute to the characteristic depression of plasma T(4) and 
T(3) levels during spontaneous metamorphosis.
J. Exp.
Zool.
286:305-312, 2000.
Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-010x(20000215)286:3<305::aid-jez9>3.0.co;2-5
PMID: 10653969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Soy Diets and Equol on Female Depressive Behaviors and Body Weight in Long‐Evans Rats <jats:sec><jats:label /><jats:p>In five different studies we examined the effect of soy‐containing diets and equol injections on depression
 serotonin levels, weight gain and white adipose tissue (WAT) deposition of female Long‐Evans rats in various stages of life.
In these experiments the rats were intact, ovariectomized or experienced natural ovarian failure (NOF).
The results of all the experiments will be presented, but experiment 5 is covered here due to space limitations.
From conception the female rats were exposed to either: a) a soy‐rich (Phyto‐600) or b) low‐soy diet (Phyto‐low).
After approximately 290 days all the rats experienced NOF.
At 330 days‐old the animals were examined in the Porsolt forced swim test (PFST).
One month later the animals were again tested in the PFST [after the animals fed the Phyto‐low diet were injected with equol (@ 5 mg/kg/day) for one week].
At the first PFST, serotonin levels and mobility were decreased in the Phyto‐low fed animals compared to the Phyto‐600 animals.
After the equol injections the differences in the measured parameters by treatment disappeared.
Equol increased mobility in aged‐female rats that had undergone NOF and increased serotonin levels comparable to Phyto‐600 fed animals.
In all the studies, animals fed a soy‐rich diet decreased body weight and adipose tissue deposition vs. a low‐soy diet.
(Grant Support: USDA 2004‐01811)</jats:p></jats:sec>
Look what the cat dragged in: do parasites contribute to human cultural diversity? 1. Behav Processes. 2005 Mar 31;68(3):279-82. doi: 10.1016/j.beproc.2004.08.019. 
Epub 2005 Jan 6.

Look what the cat dragged in: do parasites contribute to human cultural 
diversity?

Lafferty KD(1).

Author information:
(1)Western Ecological Research Center
 United States Geological Survey, c/o 
Marine Science Institute, University of California, Santa Barbara, CA 93106, 
USA.
lafferty@lifesci.ucsb.edu

Comment in
    Behav Processes.
2005 Mar 31;68(3):283-7. doi: 10.1016/j.beproc.2004.10.005.
Comment on
    Behav Processes.
2005 Mar 31;68(3):185-99. doi: 
10.1016/j.beproc.2004.06.010.
DOI: 10.1016/j.beproc.2004.08.019
PMID: 15792708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Increased NR2A:NR2B ratio compresses long-term depression range and constrains long-term memory 1. Sci Rep. 2013;3:1036. doi: 10.1038/srep01036. Epub 2013 Jan 8.

Increased NR2A:NR2B ratio compresses long-term depression range and constrains 
long-term memory.

Cui Z(1)
 Feng R, Jacobs S, Duan Y, Wang H, Cao X, Tsien JZ.
Author information:
(1)Brain and Behavior Discovery Institute and Department of Neurology, Medical 
College of Georgia, Georgia Health Sciences University, Augusta, GA 30907, USA.
The NR2A:NR2B subunit ratio of the NMDA receptors is widely known to increase in 
the brain from postnatal development to sexual maturity and to aging, yet its 
impact on memory function remains speculative.
We have generated 
forebrain-specific NR2A overexpression transgenic mice and show that these mice 
had normal basic behaviors and short-term memory, but exhibited broad long-term 
memory deficits as revealed by several behavioral paradigms.
Surprisingly, 
increased NR2A expression did not affect 1-Hz-induced long-term depression (LTD) 
or 100 Hz-induced long-term potentiation (LTP) in the CA1 region of the 
hippocampus, but selectively abolished LTD responses in the 3-5 Hz frequency 
range.
Our results demonstrate that the increased NR2A:NR2B ratio is a critical 
genetic factor in constraining long-term memory in the adult brain.
We postulate 
that LTD-like process underlies post-learning information sculpting, a novel and 
essential consolidation step in transforming new information into long-term 
memory.
DOI: 10.1038/srep01036
PMCID: PMC3539144
PMID: 23301157 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Lithium Treatment Blocks Long-Term Synaptic Depression in the Striatum 1. Neuron. 1993 May;10(5):955-62. doi: 10.1016/0896-6273(93)90210-i.

Lithium treatment blocks long-term synaptic depression in the striatum.

Calabresi P(1)
 Pisani A, Mercuri NB, Bernardi G.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Sanità Università di Roma Tor Vergata, Italy.
We have studied the effect of acute and chronic lithium treatment on the 
activity of striatal neurons recorded from corticostriatal slices.
Under control 
conditions, tetanic stimulation of glutamatergic corticostriatal terminals 
caused long-term depression (LTD) of excitatory synaptic potentials.
Acute 
lithium treatment did not affect the peak of the induction phase, but it reduced 
the following phases of LTD. LTD was completely blocked in slices obtained from 
rats chronically injected with LiCl.
Lithium treatment failed to affect the 
intrinsic membrane properties of striatal neurons and the presynaptic inhibitory 
effects of carbachol and t-ACPD.
We suggest that the lithium-induced blockade of 
LTD may contribute to the therapeutic action of lithium salts in mania and 
depression.
DOI: 10.1016/0896-6273(93)90210-i
PMID: 8494646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
ACS Chemical Neuroscience Molecule Spotlight on Valdoxen 1. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2010 Dec 15;1(12):772-3. doi: 10.1021/cn100062j.

ACS chemical neuroscience molecule spotlight on Valdoxen.

Hopkins CR(1).

Author information:
(1)Vanderbilt University Medical Center
 Department of Pharmacology and 
Vanderbilt Program in Drug Discovery, Vanderbilt University, Nashville, TN, USA, 
37232-6600.
A new and novel non-SSRI potential treatment option for major depressive 
disorders is Valdoxen (agomelatine) which is currently in phase III clinical 
studies.
Valdoxen is a norepinephrine disinhibitor (NNDI) and is also an 
antagonist of the 5-HT(2C) receptor.
DOI: 10.1021/cn100062j
PMCID: PMC3368641
PMID: 22778814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of long-term administration of tolbuamide & phenformin to normal rats on the metabolism of glycosaminoglycans L-glutamine: D-fructose-6-phosphate aminotransferase activity of the liver & aorta. 1. Indian J Biochem Biophys. 1973 Jun;10(2):141-2.

Effect of long-term administration of tolbuamide & phenformin to normal rats on 
the metabolism of glycosaminoglycans L-glutamine: D-fructose-6-phosphate 
aminotransferase activity of the liver & aorta.

Prasannan K
 Kurup PA.

PMID: 4779279 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In Vivo Release of Catecholamines from Xenogeneic Chromaffin Cell Grafts with Antidepressive Activity 1. Exp Neurol. 1994 Nov;130(1):1-8. doi: 10.1006/exnr.1994.1178.

In vivo release of catecholamines from xenogeneic chromaffin cell grafts with 
antidepressive activity.

Sortwell CE(1)
 Petty F, Kramer G, Sagen J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, University of Illinois, Chicago 
60612.
Previous studies in our laboratory have demonstrated that allografts of adrenal 
medullary tissue and xenografts of isolated bovine chromaffin cells to the rat 
frontal cortex can increase antidepressive activity in two separate animal 
models.
Biochemical and pharmacological evidence suggest that the most likely 
mechanism of these antidepressive effects is via local release of catecholamines 
into the surrounding cortical parenchyma.
The aim of the present study was to 
directly characterize the antidepressive mechanism of chromaffin cell xenografts 
by utilizing in vivo microdialysis to measure extracellular catecholamine levels 
from bovine chromaffin cell and control implanted rat frontal cortex.
Following 
transplantation, only bovine chromaffin cell grafted rats displayed significant 
increases in antidepressive activity, as assessed by the forced swimming test, 
compared to rats with grafts of bovine adrenal medullary fibroblasts or 
nontransplanted rats.
In vivo microdialysis results revealed remarkably elevated 
levels of epinephrine (EPI) and norepinephrine (NE), but not dopamine, in 
dialysates from bovine chromaffin cell-transplanted frontal cortex.
The most 
likely source of these enhanced EPI and NE levels is the grafted xenogeneic 
chromaffin cells.
The results of this study directly demonstrate that xenografts 
of bovine chromaffin cells to the rat frontal cortex provide a releasable pool 
of catecholamines for antidepressive activity.
DOI: 10.1006/exnr.1994.1178
PMID: 7821384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Characteristics of oral movements in rats during and after chronic haloperidol and fluphenazine administration 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1988;94(3):421-7. doi: 10.1007/BF00174701.

Characteristics of oral movements in rats during and after chronic haloperidol 
and fluphenazine administration.

See RE(1)
 Levin ED, Ellison GD.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of California, Los Angeles 90024.
Rats were chronically administered either haloperidol (HAL) or fluphenazine 
(FLU) via depot injections for 8 months, given these same drugs in their 
drinking water for the next 2 months, and then withdrawn from the drugs.
Throughout the experiment the animals were tested repeatedly in an enclosed tube 
using a computerized device which measured computer-scored movelets (CSMs) and, 
in the latter half of the experiment, were also scored by a human observer in 
the tube, as well as in an open cage, for observed oral movements (OMs).
In the 
tube, the animals in both neuroleptic-treated groups showed initial decreases in 
the number of CSMs and made sluggish CSMs; these effects were generally larger 
in the FLU animals.
After 6 months of chronic neuroleptics, the HAL-treated 
animals showed increased oral movements, both as reported by the human observer 
and in CSMs of all amplitudes, and this effect increased upon drug withdrawal.
FLU-treated animals showed a more persistent depression of both OMs and CSMs of 
large amplitudes.
However, the behavior most characteristic of both 
neuroleptic-treated groups was the gradual development of increases in CSMs of 
the smallest amplitudes measurable.
A different pattern was observed in the open 
cage test, where both neuroleptic groups showed significant increases in vacuous 
OMs during drug administration which rapidly became attenuated upon drug 
withdrawal.
These results indicate a complex syndrome of oral activity in the 
drugged animals which changed over time.
The measure of oral activity which most 
clearly showed the time-course for late-onset changes in oral activity was CSMs 
of the smallest amplitudes.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00174701
PMID: 3128820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Liver cancer is induced by a subnecrogenic dose of DENA when associated with fasting/refeeding: role of glutathione-transferase and lipid peroxidation 1. Free Radic Biol Med. 1999 May;26(9-10):1314-20. doi: 
10.1016/s0891-5849(98)00329-3.

Liver cancer is induced by a subnecrogenic dose of DENA when associated with 
fasting/refeeding: role of glutathione-transferase and lipid peroxidation.

Muzio G(1)
 Marengo B, Salvo R, Semeraro A, Canuto RA, Tessitore L.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Medicina e Oncologia Sperimentale, Universita' di Torino, 
Italy.
In previous studies, we reported that fasting/refeeding has a role in sustaining 
the initiation of liver cancer by a subnecrogenic (noninitiating) dose of 
diethylnitrosamine (DENA).
This research investigated whether the metabolic 
alterations imposed by fasting/refeeding provide an imbalance between the 
generation of carcinogenic molecules and the scavenger defense mechanisms in rat 
liver.
Metabolism of DENA, levels of reduced glutathione (GSH) and GSH 
transferase (GST) activity, as well as basal and stimulated malondialdehyde 
(MDA) production, were examined.
Rats fasted for 4 days showed a decrease in the 
liver levels of GSH, GST activity, monounsaturated fatty acids and % of labeled 
nuclei.
After 1 day of refeeding, at which point DENA was administered, the 
levels of GSH recovered, GST activity remained below control values, basal and 
stimulated MDA production and content of total polyunsaturated fatty acids in 
liver phospholipids decreased.
One day after DENA treatment, MDA production 
further decreased, although the % of labeled nuclei increased.
No significant 
changes in the content of arachidonic acid, the main target of peroxidation, 
were observed at any time.
The results indicated that the induction of the 
hepatocellular carcinoma was associated with a depression of GST activity and 
lipid peroxidation when rats were given 20 mg/kg of DENA after 1 day of 
refeeding after 4-day fasting.
DOI: 10.1016/s0891-5849(98)00329-3
PMID: 10381205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Regular Moderate or Intense Exercise Prevents Depression-Like Behavior without Change of Hippocampal Tryptophan Content in Chronically Tryptophan-Deficient and Stressed Mice 1. PLoS One. 2013 Jul 4;8(7):e66996. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066996. Print
2013.

Regular moderate or intense exercise prevents depression-like behavior without 
change of hippocampal tryptophan content in chronically tryptophan-deficient and 
stressed mice.

Lee H(1)
 Ohno M, Ohta S, Mikami T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry and Cell Biology, Institute of Gerontology, Nippon 
Medical School, Nakahara-ku, Kawasaki, Japan.
Regular exercise has an antidepressant effect in human subjects.
Studies using 
animals have suggested that the antidepressant effect of exercise is 
attributable to an increase of brain 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT); however, the 
precise mechanism underlying the antidepressant action via exercise is unclear.
In contrast, the effect of 5-HT on antidepressant activity has not been 
clarified, in part because the therapeutic response to antidepressant drugs has 
a time lag in spite of the rapid increase of brain 5-HT upon administration of 
these drugs.
This study was designed to investigate the contribution of brain 
5-HT to the antidepressant effect of exercise.
Mice were fed a 
tryptophan-deficient diet and stressed using chronic unpredictable stress (CUS) 
for 4 weeks with or without the performance of either moderate or intense 
exercise on a treadmill 3 days per week.
The findings demonstrated that the 
onset of depression-like behavior is attributable not to chronic reduction of 
5-HT but to chronic stress.
Regular exercise, whether moderate or intense, 
prevents depression-like behavior with an improvement of adult hippocampal cell 
proliferation and survival and without the recovery of 5-HT.
Concomitantly, the 
mice that exercised showed increased hippocampal noradrenaline.
Regular exercise 
prevents the impairment of not long-term memory but short-term memory in a 
5-HT-reduced state.
Together, these findings suggest that: (1) chronic reduction 
of brain 5-HT may not contribute to the onset of depression-like behavior; (2) 
regular exercise, whether moderate or intense, prevents the onset of chronic 
stress-induced depression-like behavior independent of brain 5-HT and dependent 
on brain adrenaline; and (3) regular exercise prevents chronic tryptophan 
reduction-induced impairment of not long-term but short-term memory.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0066996
PMCID: PMC3701529
PMID: 23861751 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Antidepressant actions of lateral habenula deep brain stimulation differentially correlate with CaMKII/GSK3/AMPK signaling locally and in the infralimbic cortex 1. Behav Brain Res. 2016 Jun 1;306:170-7. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.02.039. Epub
2016  Mar 5.

Antidepressant actions of lateral habenula deep brain stimulation differentially 
correlate with CaMKII/GSK3/AMPK signaling locally and in the infralimbic cortex.

Kim Y(1)
 Morath B(2), Hu C(2), Byrne LK(3), Sutor SL(2), Frye MA(2), Tye SJ(4).
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA; School of Psychology, Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria 3125, Australia.
(2)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA.
(3)School of Psychology, Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria 3125, Australia.
(4)Department of Psychiatry and Psychology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, 
USA; School of Psychology, Deakin University, Burwood, Victoria 3125, Australia; 
Department of Department of Molecular Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905, USA; Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN 55455, USA.
Electronic address: 
tye.susannah@mayo.edu.
High frequency deep brain stimulation (DBS) of the lateral habenula (LHb) 
reduces symptoms of depression in severely treatment-resistant individuals.
Despite the observed therapeutic effects, the molecular underpinnings of DBS are 
poorly understood.
This study investigated the efficacy of high frequency LHb 
DBS (130Hz; 200μA; 90μs) in an animal model of tricyclic antidepressant 
resistance.
Further, we reported DBS mediated changes in 
Ca(2+)/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase (CaMKIIα/β), glycogen synthase kinase 
3 (GSK3α/β) and AMP-activated protein kinase (AMPK) both locally and in the 
infralimbic cortex (IL).
Protein expressions were then correlated to immobility 
time during the forced swim test (FST).
Antidepressant actions were quantified 
via FST.
Treatment groups comprised of animals treated with adrenocorticotropic 
hormone alone (ACTH; 100μg/day, 14days, n=7), ACTH with active DBS (n=7), sham 
DBS (n=8), surgery only (n=8) or control (n=8).
Active DBS significantly reduced 
immobility in ACTH-treated animals (p<0.05).
For this group, western blot 
results demonstrated phosphorylation status of LHb CaMKIIα/β and GSK3α/β 
significantly correlated to immobility time in the FST.
Concurrently, we 
observed phosphorylation status of CaMKIIα/β, GSK3α/β, and AMPK in the IL to be 
negatively correlated with antidepressant actions of DBS.
These findings suggest 
that activity dependent phosphorylation of CaMKIIα/β, and GSK3α/β in the LHb 
together with the downregulation of CaMKIIα/β, GSK3α/β, and AMPK in the IL, 
contribute to the antidepressant actions of DBS.
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2016.02.039
PMID: 26956153 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dopamine enhancement and depression of glutamate-regulated calcium and electrical activity in hypothalamic neurons <jats:p> 1. The neurotransmitter dopamine is found throughout the hypothalamus both in cell bodies and in axons originating from intra- and extrahypothalamic sources. To study the mechanisms of action of dopamine on cultured rat hypothalamic neurons
 particularly in relation to Ca2+ regulation, we used Ca2+ digital imaging with fura-2 and whole cell patch-clamp recording.
We focused on the modulatory actions of dopamine on glutamate.
2.
Dopamine administration had little or no independent effect on intracellular Ca2+.
However, in the presence of tetrodotoxin to block action potentials and action-potential-dependent transmitter release, dopamine (10 microM for 2-3 min) caused an increase in glutamate-evoked Ca2+ rises in 22% of 64 neurons and depressed glutamate-evoked Ca2+ rises in an equal number of neurons.
Shorter exposure to dopamine reduced the number of responding cells.
3.
Dopamine application to neurons with an elevated Ca2+ due to synaptic release of glutamate (in the absence of tetrodotoxin) generally caused a decrease in Ca2+ levels (40% of 106 neurons), but sometimes increased cytosolic Ca2+ (10% of 106 neurons).
That dopamine influenced cells differently in conditions of spontaneous activity compared with evoked activity may be due to dopamine effects on presynaptic receptors detected under conditions of ongoing synaptic release of glutamate.
4.
Dopamine modulation of glutamate responses was detected at early stages of neuronal development (embryonic day 18 after 2 days in vitro) and also after 60 days in vitro.
5.
The D1, D2, and D3 dopamine receptor agonists SKF38393, quinpirole, and 7-OH-DPAT (+/- 7 hydroxy-dipropylaminotetralin) caused a reduction in Ca2+ levels raised by endogenous glutamate release or evoked by exogenous glutamate application.
6.
To block the actions of dopamine released by hypothalamic neurons, D1 and D2 dopamine receptor antagonists were used.
As with dopamine, dopamine antagonists had no effect on intracellular Ca2+ during glutamate receptor blockade.
In the absence of glutamate receptor block, the D1 antagonist SCH23390 (1 microM) reduced Ca2+ in responding cells; in contrast, the D2 antagonist eticlopride (1 microM) generated a delayed increase in Ca2+ levels.
7.
Dopamine is known to activate second messengers through G proteins independent of changes in membrane potential or input resistance.
Whole cell recording was used to demonstrate that, parallel to the modulation of Ca2+, dopamine exerted a dramatic change in glutamate-mediated electrical activity, generally depressing activity and hyperpolarizing the membrane potential (8 of 15 neurons).
In a smaller number of neurons (5 of 15), dopamine enhanced glutamate-mediated excitatory activity.
8.
Dopamine-evoked changes in membrane potential were in part mediated through modulation of glutamate actions.
Dopamine depressed glutamate-evoked currents in a dose-dependent fashion, with Hill slopes in individual neurons ranging from 0.3 to 0.6.
Dopamine could also evoke a direct hyperpolarizing action on hypothalamic neurons in the presence of tetrodotoxin or glutamate receptor blockers, at least in part by opening K+ channels.
9.
Glutamate plays an important role as a primary excitatory transmitter within the hypothalamus.
Our data support the hypothesis that a major mechanism of dopamine's influence on hypothalamic neurons involves the modulation of glutamate's excitatory action, mostly by inhibition.
This is consistent with the hypothesis that modulation of glutamate activity may be an important mechanism of dopamine action throughout the nervous system.
</jats:p>
Plasticity in serotonin control mechanisms in the gut 1. Curr Opin Pharmacol. 2003 Dec;3(6):600-7. doi: 10.1016/j.coph.2003.07.005.

Plasticity in serotonin control mechanisms in the gut.

Gershon MD(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology
 Columbia University, College of 
Physicians and Surgeons, 630 West 168th Street, New York, NY 10032, USA.
mdg4@columbia.edu

5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT or serotonin) is a charged molecule and must be 
transported across biological membranes.
Enzymes that catabolize 5-HT are all 
intracellular; therefore, 5-HT inactivation requires a high affinity 
transporter, known as serotonin transporter (SERT or 5-HTT).
In the central and 
enteric nervous systems, SERT is located in serotonergic neurons; however, these 
neurons are not present in the gastrointestinal mucosa, where 5-HT initiates 
peristaltic and secretory reflexes.
Instead, SERT is expressed by enterocytes.
The severity of gastrointestinal effects caused by drugs that inhibit SERT, such 
as tricyclic antidepressants, selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors and 
cocaine, does not usually prevent their therapeutic or recreational use because 
backup transporters and alterations in receptor gene expression allow the gut to 
adapt, albeit imperfectly, to their toxicity.
DOI: 10.1016/j.coph.2003.07.005
PMID: 14644011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Prevention of atherogenic dislipoproteinemias and metabolic disorders in the liver in emotional-pain stress]. 1. Vopr Med Khim. 1988 Nov-Dec;34(6):104-9.

[Prevention of atherogenic dislipoproteinemias and metabolic disorders in the 
liver in emotional-pain stress].

[Article in Russian]

Meerson FZ
 Tverdokhlib VP, Nikonorov AA.
Atherogenous dislipoproteinemia, involving a decrease in HDL cholesterol and 
3-4-fold increase in the atherogeneity index was found to develop in rats after 
emotional-pain-dependent stress.
Lipid peroxidation was activated in liver 
tissue of the animals, which was expressed as an increase in the MDA content, a 
decrease in SOD activity and as marked activation of fructose I-phosphate 
aldolase, an enzyme specific for liver tissue, in blood serum.
The impairment of 
liver tissue caused an inhibition of 7 alpha-cholesterol hydroxylase--key enzyme 
of cholesterol hydroxylation into bile acids; the phenomenon may be of 
importance in development of dislipoproteinemias.
Preadaptation of the animals 
to moderate hypoxia as well as administration of an antioxidant ionol prevented 
the activation of lipid peroxidation in liver tissue, liberation of fructose 
I-phosphate aldolase into blood, depression of 7 alpha-cholesterol hydroxylase 
and protected against the stress-dependent atherogenous dislipoproteinemia.
Possible chemical and adaptational protection of liver, which is a very 
stress-sensitive tissue, is discussed.
PMID: 3238931 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Repetitive concentric wave-ring spread of oligemia/hyperemia in the sensorimotor cortex accompanying K+-induced spreading depression in rats and cats 1. Neurosci Lett. 2002 Apr 12;322(3):157-60. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(02)00072-1.

Repetitive concentric wave-ring spread of oligemia/hyperemia in the sensorimotor 
cortex accompanying K(+)-induced spreading depression in rats and cats.

Tomita Y(1)
 Tomita M, Schiszler I, Amano T, Tanahashi N, Kobari M, Takeda H, 
Ohtomo M, Fukuuchi Y.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Saitama Municipal Hospital, 2460 Mimuro, Saitama 
City, Saitama 336-8522, Japan.
y-tomita@med.keio.ac.jp

Vascular changes accompanying spreading depression (SD) remain controversial.
We 
examined dynamic alterations of local cerebral blood volume (CBV) during SD by 
observing light transmission at an isosbestic point of hemoglobin (550 nm) in 
seven rats and five cats under alpha-chloralose/urethane anesthesia.
The two 
species were used for comparison between the lissencephalic and gyrencephalic 
brains.
We found that a concentrated K(+) solution microinjected into the 
sensorimotor cortex provoked CBV changes that appeared as a repetitive 
propagation of concentric wave-rings of ischemia followed by hyperemia expanding 
peripherally from the injection site at speeds of 1.9-3.2 mm/min.
The dynamic 
CBV changes continued repeatedly every 1-5 min for more than 30 min in three 
rats, ceased within 30 min in three rats and remained at the site of K(+) 
injection in one rat.
Similar repeated CBV changes occurred in two out of five 
cats.
DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(02)00072-1
PMID: 11897162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mass spectrometry imaging of amino neurotransmitters: a comparison of derivatization methods and application in mouse brain tissue 1. Metabolomics. 2016;12:30. doi: 10.1007/s11306-015-0926-0. Epub 2016 Jan 8.

Mass spectrometry imaging of amino neurotransmitters: a comparison of 
derivatization methods and application in mouse brain tissue.

Esteve C(1)
 Tolner EA(2), Shyti R(3), van den Maagdenberg AM(4), McDonnell 
LA(5).
Author information:
(1)Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC Leiden, The Netherlands.
(2)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(3)Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands.
(4)Department of Neurology, Leiden University Medical Center, Leiden, The 
Netherlands ; Department of Human Genetics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Leiden, The Netherlands.
(5)Center for Proteomics and Metabolomics, Leiden University Medical Center, 
Einthovenweg 20, 2333 ZC Leiden, The Netherlands ; Fondazione Pisana per la 
Scienza ONLUS, Pisa, Italy.
The detection of small polar compounds such as amino neurotransmitters by MALDI 
mass spectrometry imaging has been hindered by low-detection sensitivity and 
background interferences.
Recently, several of on-tissue chemical derivatization 
strategies have been independently reported that enable their detection.
Here, 
we present a comparison between these methods, and demonstrate the visualization 
of the distributions of up to 23 amino metabolites in tissue.
We applied this 
methodology to detect alterations of these compounds after inducing an 
experimental cortical spreading depression in mouse brain, which causes profound 
transient alterations in key neurotransmitters in one hemisphere and is relevant 
for migraine and various other neurological disorders.
DOI: 10.1007/s11306-015-0926-0
PMCID: PMC4705126
PMID: 26793043
Platelet aggregation inhibitors. VIII. 2-Thioadenine derivatives. 1. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 1977 Jul;25(7):1811-21. doi: 10.1248/cpb.25.1811.

Platelet aggregation inhibitors. VIII. 2-Thioadenine derivatives.

Kikugawa K
 Suehiro H, Aoki A.

DOI: 10.1248/cpb.25.1811
PMID: 908099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The inhibition of long-term potentiation in the rat dentate gyrus by pro-inflammatory cytokines is attenuated in the presence of nicotine 1. Neurosci Lett. 2003 Jun 26;344(2):103-6. doi: 10.1016/s0304-3940(03)00440-3.

The inhibition of long-term potentiation in the rat dentate gyrus by 
pro-inflammatory cytokines is attenuated in the presence of nicotine.

Curran BP(1)
 O'Connor JJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Human Anatomy and Physiology, Conway Institute of Biomolecular 
and Biomedical Research, National Neuroscience Network, University College 
Dublin, Earlsfort Terrace, Dublin 2, Ireland.
Nicotine has previously been shown to affect both long-term potentiation (LTP) 
and long-term depression and to reverse age-related impairments of LTP in the 
hippocampus.
Levels of proinflammatory cytokines are known to be elevated with 
age and to inhibit LTP.
In the present study we have investigated the effects of 
three pro-inflammatory cytokines on nicotine-enhanced LTP in the rat hippocampus 
in vitro.
In the presence of nicotine the inhibitory effect of interleukin-1 
beta, interleukin-18 and tumour necrosis factor-alpha on LTP was eliminated.
Furthermore, significant depotentiation of established LTP could not be obtained 
in slices treated with nicotine.
These experiments demonstrate that nicotine can 
reverse the inhibitory effects of pro-inflammatory cytokines on LTP.
DOI: 10.1016/s0304-3940(03)00440-3
PMID: 12782338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fish Consumption Moderates Depressive Symptomatology in Elderly Men and Women from the IKARIA Study <jats:p><jats:italic>Background</jats:italic>. The aim was to examine the association of depressive symptoms with fish eating habits
 in elderly individuals.<jats:italic>Methods</jats:italic>.
From June to October of 2009, we studied 330 men and 343 women, aged 65 to 100 years, permanent inhabitants of Ikaria Island.
Among several characteristics, depression was assessed with the Geriatric Depression scale (GDS range 0–15), while dietary habits through a valid semiquantitative food frequency questionnaire.<jats:italic>Results</jats:italic>.
Women had significantly higher values of the GDS compared to men ( versus , ).
Participants in the upper tertile of depression scale ate less frequent fish and consumed higher quantities of alcohol, compared to those in the lowest tertile (all ).
Regarding fish consumption, 50% of the individuals reported consuming 1-2 times weekly, 32% 3 to 5 times weekly, 11% 2-3 times monthly, while the rest reported rare (4.5%) and everyday (1.2%) consumption.
Logistic regression showed that increased fish consumption (&gt;3 times/week versus never/rare) was inversely associated with the odds of having GDS greater the median value (i.e., 4) (, 95% CI: 0.19, 0.61), after controlling for several cofounders.<jats:italic>Conclusion</jats:italic>.
Frequent fish consumption in elderly seems to moderate depression mood.</jats:p>
Adenosine Receptor Prodrugs: Synthesis and Biological Activity of Derivatives of Potent
 ArSelective Agonists 1.
J Pharm Sci.
1994 Jan;83(1):46-53. doi: 10.1002/jps.2600830112.
Adenosine receptor prodrugs: synthesis and biological activity of derivatives of 
potent, A1-selective agonists.
Maillard MC(1), Nikodijević O, LaNoue KF, Berkich D, Ji XD, Bartus R, Jacobson 
KA.
Author information:
(1)Hershey Medical Center, Pennsylvania State University, Hershey.
5'-Ester derivatives of the potent adenosine agonists 
N6-[4-[[[[4-[[[(2-acetylaminoethyl)amino]carbonyl]methyl] 
anilino]carbonyl]methyl]phenyl]adenosine (N-AcADAC; 1) and 
N6-cyclopentyladenosine (CPA; 2) were prepared as prodrugs.
Both alkyl esters or 
carbonates (designed to enter the brain by virtue of increased lipophilicity) 
and 1,4-dihydro-1-methyl-3-[(pyridinylcarbonyl)oxy]esters designed to 
concentrate in the brain by virtue of a redox delivery system were synthesized.
In the 5'-blocked form, the adenosine agonists displayed highly diminished 
affinity for rat brain A1-adenosine receptors in binding assays.
The 
dihydropyridine prodrug 29 was active in an assay of locomotor depression in 
mice, in which adenosine agonists are highly depressant.
The behavior depression 
was not reversible by peripheral administration of a non-central nervous system 
active adenosine antagonist.
In an assay of the peripheral action of adenosine 
(i.e., the inhibition of lipolysis in rats), the parent compounds were highly 
potent and the dihydropyridine prodrug was much less potent.
DOI: 10.1002/jps.2600830112
PMCID: PMC3459066
PMID: 8138909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Influence of yohimbine on xylazine-induced depression of central nervous
 gastrointestinal and cardiovascular function in the calf.
1.
Cornell Vet.
1984 Oct;74(4):312-21.
Influence of yohimbine on xylazine-induced depression of central nervous, 
gastrointestinal and cardiovascular function in the calf.
Guard CL, Schwark WS.
The antagonistic effect of yohimbine HCl (0.25 mg/kg IV), and alpha 2-adrenergic 
antagonist, on xylazine (0.05 mg/kg IV)-induced depression of central nervous 
and cardiovascular activity and rumen motility was studied in post-weaning 
calves.
Yohimbine, administered 3 min post-xylazine, significantly decreased the 
duration of rumen amotility (38.3 +/- 4.2 min versus 14.0 +/- 2.2 min).
Sedation, however, as monitored by the duration of fetlock knuckling in calves 
suspended in a body sling, was not shortened by yohimbine treatment.
Yohimbine 
alone produced a significant tachycardia and led to a reduction of the duration 
of xylazine-induced bradycardia.
Our data indicate that yohimbine produces a 
significant reversal of xylazine-induced rumen hypomotility at dosage levels 
that are without effect on sedation induced by this drug.
PMID: 6478835 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selective Kappa Opioid Agonist for Spinal Analgesia Without the Risk of Respiratory Depression 1. Anesth Analg. 1986 Apr;65(4):350-4.

Selective kappa opioid agonist for spinal analgesia without the risk of 
respiratory depression.

Castillo R
 Kissin I, Bradley EL.
The effects of the selective kappa agonist, U-50,488H, on the motor response to 
noxious mechanical stimulation when administered intrathecally, as well as on 
respiratory rate and PaCO2 when administered by intracerebroventricular 
injection, were compared with those of morphine in experiments on rats.
The 
agonist U-50,488H caused a dose-dependent increase in the threshold to noxious 
stimulation but did not have a potential for depression of resting ventilation.
The results suggest that selective kappa opioid agonists may be suitable for 
clinical spinal (epidural) analgesia without the associated risk of respiratory 
depression.
PMID: 3006552 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Intracellular Ca2+ thresholds for induction of excitatory long-term depression and inhibitory long-term potentiation in a cerebellar Purkinje neuron 1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2016 Jan 22;469(4):803-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.12.065. Epub 2015 Dec 19.

Intracellular Ca(2+) thresholds for induction of excitatory long-term depression 
and inhibitory long-term potentiation in a cerebellar Purkinje neuron.

Nakamura Y(1)
 Hirano T(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.
(2)Department of Biophysics, Graduate School of Science, Kyoto University, 
Sakyo-ku, Kyoto 606-8502, Japan.
Electronic address: 
thirano@neurosci.biophys.kyoto-u.ac.jp.
Synaptic plasticity in the cerebellar cortex contributes to motor learning.
In 
particular, long-term depression at excitatory parallel fiber - Purkinje neuron 
synapses has been intensively studied as a primary cellular mechanism for motor 
learning.
Recent studies showed that synaptic plasticity other than long-term 
depression such as long-term potentiation at inhibitory interneuron - Purkinje 
neuron synapses called rebound potentiation is also involved in motor learning.
It was suggested that long-term depression and rebound potentiation might 
synergistically support motor learning.
Here, we have examined induction 
conditions of long-term depression and rebound potentiation in cultured rat 
Purkinje neurons, and found that both of them were induced simultaneously by 
certain patterns of depolarization of a Purkinje neuron.
Further, we found that 
long-term depression was induced by shorter depolarizing pulses causing a 
smaller intracellular Ca(2+) increase than rebound potentiation.
These results 
support an idea that long-term depression and rebound potentiation 
synergistically contribute to motor learning, and suggest that long-term 
depression may play a primary role in wider variety of motor learning paradigms 
than rebound potentiation.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbrc.2015.12.065
PMID: 26707644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant-like effects of methanol extract of Hibiscus tiliaceus flowers in mice <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Background</jats:title>
            <jats:p>
              <jats:italic>Hibiscus tiliaceus</jats:italic> L. (Malvaceae) is used in postpartum disorders. Our purpose was to examine the antidepressant
 anxiolytic and sedative actions of the methanol extract of <jats:italic>H.
tiliaceus</jats:italic> flowers using animal models.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Methods</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Adult male Swiss albino mice were treated with saline, standard drugs or methanol extract of H. tiliaceus and then subjected to behavioral tests.
The forced swimming and tail suspension tests were used as predictive animal models of antidepressant activity, where the time of immobility was considered.
The animals were submitted to the elevated plus-maze and ketamine-induced sleeping time to assess anxiolytic and sedative activities, respectively.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Results</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Methanol extract of <jats:italic>H.
tiliaceus</jats:italic> significantly decreased the duration of immobility in both animal models of antidepressant activity, forced swimming and tail suspension tests.
This extract did not potentiate the effect of ketamine-induced hypnosis, as determined by the time to onset and duration of sleeping time.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Conclusion</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Our results indicate an antidepressant-like profile of action for the extract of <jats:italic>Hibiscus tiliaceus</jats:italic> without sedative side effect.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
d-Amphetamine attenuates decreased cerebral glucose utilization after unilateral sensorimotor cortex contusion in rats 1. Brain Res. 1997 Nov 28;777(1-2):42-50. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(97)00717-8.

d-Amphetamine attenuates decreased cerebral glucose utilization after unilateral 
sensorimotor cortex contusion in rats.

Queen SA(1)
 Chen MJ, Feeney DM.
Author information:
(1)Physical Therapy Department, School of Pharmacy and Allied Health Sciences, 
The University of Montana, Missoula 59812-1076, USA.
Unilateral contusion injury to the sensorimotor cortex causes, among other 
symptoms, a transient contralateral hindlimb hemiparesis in rats.
A single i.p.
2 mg/kg dose of d-amphetamine (d-AMPH) 24 h after injury accelerates spontaneous 
recovery from this particular deficit.
The mechanism(s) of spontaneous and 
d-AMPH enhanced recovery are unknown but alleviation of a neuronal depression 
has been proposed.
This quantitative CMRglu study was designed to determine 
effects of cortical contusion injury and d-AMPH on CMRglu in cortical and 
subcortical structures.
At 2 days after injury, CMRglu was significantly reduced 
compared to sham-operated controls only in structures ipsilateral to contusion.
Affected structures included the caudate putamen, medial geniculate nucleus, 
lateral geniculate nucleus and the parietal cortex immediately posterior to 
injury.
By 6 days post-contusion, the hypometabolism partially reversed in all 
structures.
A single low dose of d-AMPH significantly alleviated the 
post-traumatic CMRglu reduction at 2 days after injury.
Importantly, while this 
alleviation was not significant for any single structure, the main effect of 
treatment was highly significant.
d-AMPH increased CMRglu at 2 days post-injury 
by 18-33% compared to contused/saline-treated rats.
These results suggest that 
alleviation of neuronal metabolic depression may contribute to spontaneous and 
d-AMPH enhanced recovery.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(97)00717-8
PMID: 9449411 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of various levels of dietary <i>Artemisia abyssinica</i> leaves on rats <jats:p> Artemisia abyssinica leaves
 a traditional medicine for the treatment of various disorders, were fed to male Wistar rats at 2% and 10% of the standard diet for 6 weeks.
A 2% A. abyssinica leaf diet was not toxic to rats.
Depression in growth, hepatopathy and nephropathy were observed in rats fed a diet containing 10% of A. abyssinica leaves.
These findings were accompanied by leukopenia, anaemia and alterations of serum aspartate aminotransferase (AST), alanine aminotransferase (ALT) and gamma glutamyl transferase (GGT) activities with changes in concentrations of total protein, albumin, cholesterol and urea.
</jats:p>
<i>Cinnamomum cassia</i>: an implication of serotonin reuptake inhibition in animal models of depression 1. Nat Prod Res. 2016;30(10):1212-4. doi: 10.1080/14786419.2015.1047776. Epub
2015  Jul 2.

Cinnamomum cassia: an implication of serotonin reuptake inhibition in animal 
models of depression.

Zada W(1)
 Zeeshan S(1), Bhatti HA(2), Mahmood W(1), Rauf K(1), Abbas G(1).
Author information:
(1)a Department of Pharmacy , COMSATS Institute of Information Technology , 
Abbottabad 22060 , K.P.K , Pakistan.
(2)b H.E.J.
Research Institute of Chemistry, International Center for Chemical & 
Biological Sciences, University of Karachi , Karachi , Pakistan.
The aim of the study was to explore the traditional use of Cinnamomum cassia 
against depression.
The standardised methanolic extract of the bark of C. cassia 
was evaluated for antidepressant activity using various behavioural tests, i.e.
tail suspension test (TST), forced swim test (FST) and locomotor activity test.
The serotonergic and noradrenergic modulation was assessed using 
5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP)-induced head twitches and yohimbine potentiation 
tests, respectively.
The fluoxetine and phenelzine were used as positive 
controls in the study.
The C. cassia extract significantly decreased the 
immobility time in TST (maximum effective dose tested was 50 mg/kg) while no 
effect was observed in FST and locomotor activity test.
The extract 
significantly increased the 5-HTP-induced head twitches while yohimbine-induced 
lethality remained unaltered.
The aforementioned results are similar to that 
caused by fluoxetine.
The standardised methanolic extract of C. cassia 
demonstrated antidepressant activity that can be attributed to rise in serotonin 
levels.
DOI: 10.1080/14786419.2015.1047776
PMID: 26134381 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Changes in extracellular space volume and geometry induced by cortical spreading depression in immature and adult rats. 1. Physiol Res. 2002;51 Suppl 1:S85-93.

Changes in extracellular space volume and geometry induced by cortical spreading 
depression in immature and adult rats.

Mazel T(1)
 Richter F, Vargová L, Syková E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Institute of Experimental Medicine, Academy of 
Sciences of the Czech Republic, Prague, Czech Republic.
Changes in extracellular space (ECS) diffusion parameters, DC potentials and 
extracellular potassium concentration were studied during single and repeated 
cortical spreading depressions (SD) in 13-15 (P13-15), 21 (P21) and 90-day-old 
(adult) Wistar rats.
The real-time iontophoretic method using 
tetramethylammonium (TMA+)-selective microelectrodes was employed to measure 
three ECS parameters in the somatosensory cortex: the ECS volume fraction alpha 
(alpha = ECS volume/total tissue volume), ECS tortuosity lambda (increase in 
diffusion path length) and the nonspecific TMA+ uptake k'.
SD was elicited by 
needle prick.
SD was significantly longer at P13-15 than at P21 and in adults.
During SD, alpha in all age groups decreased from 0.21-0.23 to 0.05-0.09; lambda 
increased from 1.55-1.65 to 1.95-2.07.
Ten minutes after SD, alpha (in adults) 
and lambda (all age groups) increased compared to controls.
This increase 
persisted even 1 hour after SD.
When SD was repeated at 1 hour intervals, both 
alpha and lambda showed a gradual cumulative increase with SD repetition.
Our 
study also shows that cortical SD is, as early as P13, accompanied by severe ECS 
shrinkage and increased diffusion path length (tortuosity) with values similar 
to adults, followed by a long-lasting increase in ECS volume and tortuosity when 
compared to pre-SD values.
PMID: 12479789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of Calcium Ions in the Release of ACTH from Rat Pituitary Tissue<i>in Vitro</i> 1. Endocrinology. 1970 Aug;87(2):426-9. doi: 10.1210/endo-87-2-426.

Role of calcium ions in the release of ACTH from rat pituitary tissue in vitro.

Zimmerman G
 Fleischer N.

DOI: 10.1210/endo-87-2-426
PMID: 4316575 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Perivascular nerves contribute to cortical spreading  depression-associated hyperemia in rats <jats:p> We investigated the contribution of perivascular nerves and neurotransmitters to cortical spreading depression (CSD)-associated hyperperfusion in the rat. Chronic transection of the nasociliary nerve (NCN
 2 wk before) decreased ipsilateral CSD-associated hyperperfusion by 23 ± 13% (mean ± SD; n = 5, P &lt; 0.05), whereas acute transection of the NCN or sham surgery had no effect ( n = 8).
When the NCN and parasympathetic nerve fibers (PSN) were both chronically transected, CSD hyperperfusion was attenuated by 55 ± 19% ( n = 5, P &lt; 0.05).
Cerebrovascular reactivity to hypercapnia was not significantly affected.
Brain topical superfusion of the muscarinic receptor antagonist atropine (10<jats:sup>−4</jats:sup> M) caused a reduction of CSD hyperperfusion by 41 ± 13% ( n = 5, P &lt; 0.05).
The competitive blockade of calcitonin gene-related peptide (CGRP) receptors by CGRP-(8—37) (5 × 10<jats:sup>−7</jats:sup> M) afforded a decrease by 49 ± 19% ( n = 5, P &lt; 0.05), without affecting CO<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> reactivity ( n = 4).
The combined application of both CGRP-(8—37) and atropine further attenuated CSD hyperperfusion (by 69 ± 17%, n = 5, P &lt; 0.05).
After chronic NCN and PSN transection brain topical superfusion of CGRP-(8—37) (5 × 10<jats:sup>−7</jats:sup> M) reduced CSD hyperperfusion slightly by 9.5 ± 5% ( n = 3).
Atropine (10<jats:sup>−4</jats:sup> M) afforded a decrease by 17 ± 6% ( n = 3).
These reductions were not statistically significant.
We conclude that CSD-associated hyperperfusion is mediated in part by a depolarization of trigeminal sensory and parasympathetic nerve fibers, resulting in a release of vasoactive trigeminal and parasympathetic neurotransmitters.
</jats:p>
Anoxia on slow inward currents of immature hippocampal neurons <jats:p> 1. The effects of brief anoxia (2-4 min) on membrane currents--especially the tetrodotoxin (TTX)-insensitive
 Cd2+-sensitive slow inward currents, presumed to be Ca2+ currents--were studied by single-electrode voltage clamp in CA1 and CA3 neurons in submerged hippocampal slices from adult and newborn Wistar rats (PN1-13).
2.
In mature neurons, anoxia had no effect on Q-type inward relaxations, but slowly activating C-type outward currents were depressed.
The most striking change was the suppression of Ca inward currents (especially the slowly inactivating L-type, by greater than 95%).
This effect of anoxia was not sensitive to the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor blocker, D-aminophosphonovalerate.
Anoxia also reversibly abolished the NMDA-evoked inward current.
3.
In neurons from newborn animals (PN1-6), Q-type inward relaxations and postanoxic outward currents were very small or undetectable.
The slow inward (Ca) currents were smaller than in mature cells, but they showed a clearer separation between low-threshold, fast-inactivating and high-threshold, slowly inactivating currents.
Both types of current were more resistant to anoxia (mean depression of L-type was by only 53.3 +/- 5.6%, mean +/- SE).
4.
In such immature neurons, the NMDA-evoked inward currents were also more resistant to anoxia.
5.
By PN7-13, increasing maturation was reflected in 1) larger voltage-dependent inward currents, 2) increasingly evident Q-type relaxations and postanoxic outward currents, and 3) near-complete blockade of inward currents by anoxia (at PN11-13, mean depression of L-type currents was by 98.5 +/- 1.5%).
</jats:p>
Impaired Bidirectional Synaptic Plasticity and Procedural Memory Formation in Striatum-Specific cAMP Response Element-Binding Protein-Deficient Mice <jats:p>The striatum has a well documented role in procedural learning and memory. However
 the synaptic and molecular mechanisms of acquisition and storage of this form of memory remain poorly understood.
We examined procedural memory and plasticity in transgenic mice reversibly expressing a dominant-negative cAMP response element-binding protein (CREB) mutant in the dorsal striatum.
In these transgenic mice, corticostriatal long-term potentiation and depression are abolished, indicating that CREB function is essential for bidirectional long-term synaptic plasticity in this structure.
Importantly, CREB-deficient animals show reversible alterations in several forms of striatum-dependent memory, including footshock avoidance learning and “response” learning in the cross maze.
These findings implicate transcriptional regulation by CREB family transcription factors in striatum-dependent information processing and provide the first clear correlation between procedural learning and memory and synaptic plasticity at the corticostriatal synapse.</jats:p>
The effects of anandamide signaling enhanced by the FAAH inhibitor URB597 on coping styles in rats 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2013 Dec;230(3):353-62. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-013-3161-2. Epub 2013 Jun 7.

The effects of anandamide signaling enhanced by the FAAH inhibitor URB597 on 
coping styles in rats.

Haller J(1)
 Goldberg SR, Pelczer KG, Aliczki M, Panlilio LV.
Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Neurobiology, Institute of Experimental Medicine, 
Budapest, Hungary, haller@koki.hu.
RATIONALE: Coping styles are fundamental characteristics of behavior that affect 
susceptibility to, and resilience during, mental and physical illness.
Shifts 
from passive to active coping are considered therapeutic goals in many 
stress-related disorders, but the neural control of coping is poorly understood.
Based on earlier findings, we hypothesized that coping styles are influenced by 
endocannabinoids.
OBJECTIVES: Here, we tested whether FAAH inhibition by URB597 affects behaviors 
aimed at controlling a critical situation and the degree to which environmental 
stimuli influence behavior i.e., we studied the impact of URB597 on the two main 
attributes of coping styles.
METHODS: Rats were tested in the tail-pinch test of coping and in the elevated 
plus-maze test that was performed under highly divergent conditions.
RESULTS: Under the effects of URB597, rats focused their behavior more on the 
discomfort-inducing clamp in the tail-pinch test, i.e., they coped with the 
challenge more actively.
In the elevated plus-maze, URB597-treated rats 
demonstrated an autonomous behavioral control by reducing both "wariness" 
induced by aversive conditions and "carelessness" resulting from favorable 
conditions.
CONCLUSIONS: URB597 treatment-induced behavioral changes indicated a shift 
towards active coping with challenges.
This behavioral change appears compatible 
with the previously suggested role of endocannabinoids in emotional homeostasis.
Albeit further studies are required to characterize the role of endocannabinoids 
in coping, these findings suggest that the enhancement of endocannabinoid 
signaling may become a therapeutic option in emotional disorders characterized 
by passive coping (e.g., anxiety and depression) and in physical diseases where 
active coping is therapeutically desirable.
DOI: 10.1007/s00213-013-3161-2
PMCID: PMC3830591
PMID: 23743650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest.
The authors declare no 
conflicts of interest.
[Effect of chronic application of aminorex-fumarate on the pulmonary circulation of the rat]. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1973 Aug;23(8):1057-61.

[Effect of chronic application of aminorex-fumarate on the pulmonary circulation 
of the rat].

[Article in German]

Engelhardt R
 Kalbfleisch H.

PMID: 4801026 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Does ethanol potentiate GABAergic inhibition?]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1989 Mar-Apr;52(2):83-6.

[Does ethanol potentiate GABAergic inhibition?].

[Article in Russian]

Kozhechkin SN.

The effect of systemically and microelectro-osmotically applied ethanol on 
sensitivity of sensorimotor cortical neurons of unanesthetized rabbit brain to 
microiontophoretically administered GABA and glycine was studied. No correlation 
was found between responses of single neurons to ethanol
 GABA and glycine.
The 
inhibitory responses to ethanol were summed with responses to GABA and glycine 
(additive interaction).
Ethanol failed to potentiate GABA effect.
PMID: 2545469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
<i>Riemerella anatipestifer</i>outbreaks in commercial goose flocks and identification of isolates by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry 1. Avian Pathol. 2013 Apr;42(2):151-6. doi: 10.1080/03079457.2013.775401.

Riemerella anatipestifer outbreaks in commercial goose flocks and identification 
of isolates by MALDI-TOF mass spectrometry.

Hess C(1)
 Enichlmayr H, Jandreski-Cvetkovic D, Liebhart D, Bilic I, Hess M.

Author information:
(1)Department for Farm Animals and Veterinary Public Health, Clinic for Avian, 
Reptile and Fish Medicine, University of Veterinary Medicine Vienna, 
Veterinaerplatz 1, 1210 Vienna, Austria.
claudia.hess@vetmeduni.ac.at

Several outbreaks of Riemerella anatipestifer in commercial geese occurred 
within a short time period.
A serious disease was recognized in the affected 
birds, mainly characterized by depression and severe neurologic disturbances.
The morbidity ranged from 20 to 30% and the mortality from 5 to 20%.
Generally, 
the clinical signs started at the age of 8 to 10 days.
Post-mortem examination 
revealed fibrinous pericarditis, perihepatitis and airsacculitis in all birds.
Some of the birds also had synovitis of the tibio-tarsal joints and oedematous 
swelling of the subcutaneous tissues around these joints and metatarsus.
Histology revealed a characteristic severe inflammation with heterophilic 
granulocytes in different organs.
Bacteriological investigation was made from 
several organs and R. anatipestifer could be isolated from all birds 
investigated.
The identification of these clinical isolates, done for the first 
time by matrix-assisted laser desorption ionization-time-of-flight mass 
spectrometry, confirmed the aetiology.
Sequence analysis showed 100% similarity 
between the clinical isolates, indicating a common source of infection.
DOI: 10.1080/03079457.2013.775401
PMID: 23581442 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant effect of taurine in diabetic rats 1. Amino Acids. 2012 Oct;43(4):1525-33. doi: 10.1007/s00726-012-1226-x.

Antidepressant effect of taurine in diabetic rats.

Caletti G(1)
 Olguins DB, Pedrollo EF, Barros HM, Gomez R.

Author information:
(1)Programa de Pós Graduação em Ciências da Saúde, Universidade Federal de 
Ciências da Saúde de Porto Alegre (UFCSPA), Porto Alegre, Brazil.
Clinical and preclinical studies have shown that diabetic individuals present 
more depressive behaviors than non-diabetic individuals.
Taurine, one of the 
most abundant free amino acids in the central nervous system, modulates a 
variety of biological functions and acts as an agonist at GABAA receptors.
Our 
objective was to assess the antidepressant effect of taurine in diabetic rats.
Additionally, we studied the effect of taurine on weight gain, water and food 
intake, and blood glucose levels in diabetic and non-diabetic rats.
Male Wistar 
rats were divided into control (CTR) and streptozotocin-induced diabetic (STZ) 
groups and were administered daily 0, 25, 50 or 100 mg/kg of taurine (n = 10 per 
subgroup) intraperitoneally.
After 28 days of treatment, the animals were 
exposed to the forced swimming test, and their behaviors were recorded.
Weight 
gain, water and food intake, and blood glucose levels were measured weekly.
Our 
results showed that STZ rats had a higher immobility duration than CTR rats, and 
taurine decreased this depressive-like behavior in STZ rats at doses of 25 and 
100 mg/kg.
Both of these doses of taurine also decreased water intake and 
improved weight gain in STZ rats.
All doses of taurine decreased the water 
intake in CTR rats.
Taurine, at a dose of 100 mg/kg, decreased food intake and 
blood glucose levels in STZ rats.
Because taurine is a GABA agonist and both 
amino acids are lower in the plasma of diabetic and depressive individuals, we 
hypothesize that taurine may represent a new adjuvant drug for the treatment of 
depression in diabetic individuals.
DOI: 10.1007/s00726-012-1226-x
PMID: 22302366 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differential gene expression in the respiratory tree of the sea cucumber Apostichopus japonicus during aestivation 1. Mar Genomics. 2014 Dec;18 Pt B:173-83. doi: 10.1016/j.margen.2014.07.001. Epub
 2014 Jul 16.

Differential gene expression in the respiratory tree of the sea cucumber 
Apostichopus japonicus during aestivation.

Zhao Y(1)
 Yang H(2), Storey KB(3), Chen M(4).
Author information:
(1)Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, PR 
China; University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, PR China.
(2)Institute of Oceanology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Qingdao 266071, PR 
China.
Electronic address: hshyang@qdio.ac.cn.
(3)Institute of Biochemistry, Carleton University, 1125 Colonel By Drive, 
Ottawa, ON K1S 5B6, Canada.
(4)Fisheries College, Ocean University of China, Qingdao 266003, PR China.
Electronic address: chenmuyan@gmail.com.
Sea cucumbers, Apostichopus japonicus, experience seasonally high water 
temperatures during the summer months and enter aestivation to survive.
Aestivation is characterized by strong metabolic rate depression which is 
supported by a series of strategies including reorganizing metabolic processes, 
suppressing cell functions, enhancing cytoprotective mechanisms, and altered 
gene expression.
The respiratory tree tissue of the sea cucumber is an excellent 
material for studying aestivation, undergoing obvious atrophy during 
aestivation.
The present study analyzed the global gene expression profile of 
respiratory tree tissue of A. japonicus during aestivation by constructing and 
screening three libraries representing key stages of aestivation: 
non-aestivation (NA), deep-aestivation (DA), and arousal from aestivation (AA) 
using RNA-seq.
A total of 1240, 1184 and 303 differentially expressed genes 
(DEGs) were identified following the criteria of |log2 ratio|≥1 and FDR≤0.001 in 
comparisons of DA vs. NA, AA vs. NA and DA vs. AA.
A set of respiratory tree 
specific DEGs was identified the first time and, in addition, common DEGs that 
were responsive to aestivation in both respiratory tree and intestine were 
identified.
Functional analysis of DEGs was further performed by GO enrichment 
analysis and respiratory tree specific GO terms were screened out and provide 
interesting hints for further studies of the molecular regulation of aestivation 
in A. japonicus.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.margen.2014.07.001
PMID: 25038515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Norepinephrine-sensitive properties of C-6 astrocytoma cells. 1. Mol Pharmacol. 1974 Jan;10(1):162-74.

Norepinephrine-sensitive properties of C-6 astrocytoma cells.

Browning ET
 Schwartz JP, Breckenridge BM.
PMID: 4136180 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Metabolic preconditioning of mammalian cells: mimetic agents for hypoxia lack fidelity in promoting phosphorylation of pyruvate dehydrogenase 1. Cell Tissue Res. 2013 Jan;351(1):99-106. doi: 10.1007/s00441-012-1517-2. Epub 
2012 Nov 9.

Metabolic preconditioning of mammalian cells: mimetic agents for hypoxia lack 
fidelity in promoting phosphorylation of pyruvate dehydrogenase.

Borcar A(1)
 Menze MA, Toner M, Hand SC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Division of Cellular, Developmental and 
Integrative Biology, Louisiana State University, Baton Rouge, LA 70803, USA.
aborca2@tigers.lsu.edu

Induction of HIF-1α by oxygen limitation promotes increased phosphorylation and 
catalytic depression of mitochondrial pyruvate dehydrogenase (PDH) and an 
enhanced glycolytic poise in cells.
Cobalt chloride and desferrioxamine are 
widely used as mimics for hypoxia because they increase the levels of HIF-1α.
We 
evaluated the ability of these agents to elicit selected physiological responses 
to hypoxia as a means to metabolically precondition mammalian cells, but without 
the detrimental effects of hypoxia.
We show that, while CoCl(2) does increase 
HIF-1α in a dose-dependent manner, it unexpectedly and strikingly decreases PDH 
phosphorylation at E1α sites 1, 2, and 3 (Ser(293), Ser(300), and Ser(232), 
respectively) in HepG2 cells.
This same effect is also observed for site 1 in 
mouse NIH/3T3 fibroblasts and J774 macrophages.
CoCl(2) unexpectedly decreases 
the mRNA expression for PDH kinase-2 in HepG2 cells, which likely explains the 
dephosphorylation of PDH observed.
And nor does desferrioxamine promote the 
expected increase in PDH phosphorylation.
Dimethyloxaloylglycine (a prolyl 
hydroxylase inhibitor) performs better in this regard, but failed to promote the 
stronger effects seen with hypoxia.
Consequently, CoCl(2) and desferrioxamine 
are unreliable mimics of hypoxia for physiological events downstream of HIF-1α 
stabilization.
Our study demonstrates that mimetic chemicals must be chosen with 
caution and evaluated thoroughly if bona fide cellular outcomes are to be 
promoted with fidelity.
DOI: 10.1007/s00441-012-1517-2
PMCID: PMC3537919
PMID: 23138570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Timosaponin derivative YY-23 acts as a non-competitive NMDA receptor antagonist and exerts a rapid antidepressant-like effect in mice 1. Acta Pharmacol Sin. 2016 Feb;37(2):166-76. doi: 10.1038/aps.2015.111. Epub
2015  Dec 21.

Timosaponin derivative YY-23 acts as a non-competitive NMDA receptor antagonist 
and exerts a rapid antidepressant-like effect in mice.

Zhang Q(1)
 Guo F(1), Fu ZW(1), Zhang B(1), Huang CG(1), Li Y(1).
Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Receptor Research, Shanghai Institute of Materia Medica, 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Shanghai 201203, China.
AIM: N-methyl-D-aspartic acid (NMDA) receptor modulators have shown promising 
results as potential antidepressant agents, whereas timosaponins extracted from 
the Chinese herb Rhizoma Anemarrhenae exhibit antidepressant activities.
In the 
present study we examined whether YY-23, a modified metabolite of timosaponin 
B-III, could affect NMDA receptors in rat hippocampal neurons in vitro, and 
evaluated its antidepressant-like effects in stressed mice.
METHODS: NMDA-induced currents were recorded in acutely dissociated rat 
hippocampal CA1 neurons using a whole-cell recording technique.
C57BL/6 mice 
were exposed to a 6-week chronic mild stress (CMS) or a 10-d chronic social 
defeat stress (CSDS).
The stressed mice were treated with YY-23 (20 
mg·kg(-1)·d(-1)) or a positive-control drug, fluoxetine (10 mg·kg(-1)·d(-1)) for 
3 weeks.
Behavioral assessments were carried out every week.
RESULTS: In acutely dissociated rat hippocampal CA1 neurons, YY-23 selectively 
and reversibly inhibited NMDA-induced currents with an EC50 value of 2.8 μmol/L.
This inhibition of NMDA-induced currents by YY-23 was non-competitive, and had 
no features of voltage-dependency or use-dependency.
Treatment of the stressed 
mice with YY-23 not only reversed CMS-induced deficiency of sucrose preference 
and immobility time, and CSDS-induced reduction of social interaction, but also 
had faster onset as compared to fluoxetine.
CONCLUSION: YY-23 is a novel non-competitive antagonist of NMDA receptors with 
promising rapid antidepressant-like effects in mouse models of CMS and CSDS 
depression.
DOI: 10.1038/aps.2015.111
PMCID: PMC4753364
PMID: 26687936 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A tetracycline derivative
 minocycline, reduces inflammation and protects against focal cerebral ischemia with a wide therapeutic window <jats:p>The only treatment of patients with acute ischemic stroke is thrombolytic therapy, which benefits only a fraction of stroke patients.
Both human and experimental studies indicate that ischemic stroke involves secondary inflammation that significantly contributes to the outcome after ischemic insult.
Minocycline is a semisynthetic second-generation tetracycline that exerts antiinflammatory effects that are completely separate from its antimicrobial action.
Because tetracycline treatment is clinically well tolerated, we investigated whether minocycline protects against focal brain ischemia with a wide therapeutic window.
Using a rat model of transient middle cerebral artery occlusion, we show that daily treatment with minocycline reduces cortical infarction volume by 76 ± 22% when the treatment is started 12 h before ischemia and by 63 ± 35% when started even 4 h after the onset of ischemia.
The treatment inhibits morphological activation of microglia in the area adjacent to the infarction, inhibits induction of IL-1β-converting enzyme, and reduces cyclooxygenase-2 expression and prostaglandin E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>production.
Minocycline had no effect on astrogliosis or spreading depression, a wave of ionic transients thought to contribute to enlargement of cortical infarction.
Treatment with minocycline may act directly on brain cells, because cultured primary neurons were also salvaged from glutamate toxicity.
Minocycline may represent a prototype of an antiinflammatory compound that provides protection against ischemic stroke and has a clinically relevant therapeutic window.</jats:p>
EFFECTS OF PHOSPHODIESTERASE INHIBITORS ON CYCLIC AMP LEVELS AND ON LIPOLYSIS* 1. Ann N Y Acad Sci. 1971 Dec 30;185:129-36. doi: 
10.1111/j.1749-6632.1971.tb45243.x.

Effects of phosphodiesterase inhibitors on cyclic AMP levels and on lipolysis.

Beavo JA
 Rogers NL, Crofford OB, Baird CE, Hardman JG, Sutherland EW, Newman 
EV.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1749-6632.1971.tb45243.x
PMID: 4330487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cognitive initiation and depression as predictors of future instrumental activities of daily living among older medical rehabilitation patients 1. J Clin Exp Neuropsychol. 2008 Feb;30(2):236-44. doi:
10.1080/13803390701370006.

Cognitive initiation and depression as predictors of future instrumental 
activities of daily living among older medical rehabilitation patients.

Yochim BP(1)
 Lequerica A, MacNeill SE, Lichtenberg PA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Colorado at Colorado Springs, 1420 
Austin Bluffs Parkway, Colorado Springs, CO 80933-7150, USA.
byochim@uccs.edu

This study investigated relationships among depressive symptoms, cognitive 
initiation, and instrumental activities of daily living (IADL) in 128 older 
African American medical rehabilitation patients.
Participants were administered 
the Geriatric Depression Scale and measures of cognitive initiation 
Initiation/Perseveration subtest of the Dementia Rating Scale and verbal fluency 
(Controlled Oral Word Association Test letter C and Animal Naming)--at hospital 
discharge.
Cognitive initiation predicted IADL 3 and 6 months after hospital 
discharge, independently of baseline IADL.
While depression was related to 
current IADL, it did not independently predict future IADL.
Results suggest that 
executive dysfunction,specifically cognitive initiation, is a key predictor of 
future IADL.
DOI: 10.1080/13803390701370006
PMID: 18938675 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Biological activities of isatin and its derivatives. 1. Acta Pharm. 2005 Mar;55(1):27-46.

Biological activities of isatin and its derivatives.

Pandeya SN(1)
 Smitha S, Jyoti M, Sridhar SK.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutics, Institute of Technology, Banaras Hindu 
University, Varanasi-221 005, India.
snpandeya@rediffmail.com

Isatin is an endogenous compound identified in humans that possesses a wide 
range of biological activities.
Isatin has anxiogenic, sedative, anticonvulsant 
activities and acts as a potent antagonist on atrial natriuretic peptide 
receptors in vitro.
A series of p-substituted isatin semicarbazones have shown 
anticonvulsant activity in MES, scPTZ and scSTY tests.
Various isatin-N-Mannich 
bases of isatin-3-thiosemicarbazones have shown antiviral and tuberculostatic 
activity.
Methisazone is an effective compound against variola and vaccinia 
viruses.
The N-dimethyl and morpholino derivative of 5-methyl isatin and 
trimethoprim exhibited an EC50 of more than 4.3 and 17.7 mg mL(-1), 
respectively.
Isatin (3-o-nitrophenyl) hydrazone has shown activity against 
Walker carcinoma-256.
Various substituted indolinones showed antitubercular 
activity against M. tuberculosis H37Rv with MIC ranging from 10-20 microg 
mL(-1).
Isatin derivatives of Mannich bases had fibrinolytic, muscle relaxant, 
antiallergic, immunosuppressant, and antithrombotic activity.
Isatin showed 
cardioinhibitory effect on frog heart, and hypotensive, respiratory depression 
and antidiuretic effects.
PMID: 15907222 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
GABAA Receptor Kinetics in the Cerebellar Nuclei: Evidence for Detection of Transmitter from Distant Release Sites 1. Biophys J. 2005 Mar;88(3):1740-54. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.104.055814. Epub 2004
 Dec 30.

GABAA receptor kinetics in the cerebellar nuclei: evidence for detection of 
transmitter from distant release sites.

Pugh JR(1)
 Raman IM.
Author information:
(1)Institute for Neuroscience, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL 60208, USA.
Comment in
    Biophys J.
2005 Mar;88(3):1505-6. doi: 10.1529/biophysj.104.057802.
Neurons of the cerebellar nuclei receive GABAergic input from Purkinje cells.
Purkinje boutons have several closely spaced presynaptic densities without GABA 
transporters, raising the possibility that neurotransmitter released by one 
presynaptic site diffuses to multiple postsynaptic sites.
To test whether such 
local spillover may contribute to transmission, we studied gating of GABA(A) 
receptors at 31-33 degrees C in cerebellar nuclear neurons acutely dissociated 
from mice.
Currents were evoked by rapid application of long steps, brief 
pulses, and high-frequency trains of GABA to outside-out patches.
Receptors 
desensitized and deactivated rapidly, and dose-response measurements estimated 
an EC(50) of approximately 30 microM.
From these data, a kinetic scheme was 
developed that replicated the recorded currents.
Next, we simulated diffusion of 
GABA in the synaptic cleft, constrained by previous electron microscopic data, 
and drove the kinetic GABA(A) receptor model with modeled concentration 
transients.
Simulations predicted receptor occupancies of approximately 100% 
directly opposite the release site and approximately 50% at distant postsynaptic 
densities, such that receptors up to 700 nm from a release site opened on the 
timescale of the inhibitory postsynaptic currents before desensitizing.
Further 
simulations of probabilistic release from multiple-site boutons suggested that 
local spillover-mediated transmission slows the onset and limits the extent of 
depression during high-frequency signaling.
DOI: 10.1529/biophysj.104.055814
PMCID: PMC1305230
PMID: 15626699 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Concomitant use of tramadol and venlafaxine – evaluation of antidepressant-like activity and other behavioral effects in rats 1. Pharmacol Rep. 2012;64(6):1350-8. doi: 10.1016/s1734-1140(12)70932-5.

Concomitant use of tramadol and venlafaxine - evaluation of antidepressant-like 
activity and other behavioral effects in rats.

Szkutnik-Fiedler D(1)
 Kus K, Balcerkiewicz M, Grześkowiak E, Nowakowska E, 
Burda K, Ratajczak P, Sadowski C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Pharmacy and Biopharmacy, Poznan University of Medical 
Sciences, Sw. Marii Magdaleny 14, PL 61-861 Poznań, Poland.
d.szkutnik@wp.pl

BACKGROUND: The aim of this study was to evaluate antidepressant-like effect 
(Porsolt test), locomotor activity and motor coordination of joint 
administration of tramadol (TRM) and venlafaxine (VEN) in rats.
METHODS: The tests were performed on male Wistar rats after single and chronic 
treatment (7 and 14 days) with TRM intraperitoneally (ip) and VEN orally (po) 
administered once a day.
The controls were given 0.5% carboxymethylcellulose 
(CMC) solution (0.5 ml per rat, ip and po).
RESULTS: It was found that combination of TRM (5 mg/kg ip) with VEN (20 mg/kg 
po) caused an increased antidepressant effect compared to TRM and VEN 
administered alone, with no effect on locomotor activity or motor coordination 
in rats, which may be of clinical significance.
It was also observed that 
reduced time of active swimming of animals in Porsolt test with an increased 
dose (10 and 20 mg/kg) and time of administration (7 and 14 days) of TRM were 
correlated with a decreased locomotor activity in rats.
It may indicate the 
development of tolerance to TRM's antidepressant effect in rats during chronic 
treatment with doses higher than 5 mg/kg.
CONCLUSION: It can be expected that combination of low doses of TRM and VEN 
could potentially be feasible and relatively safe in cases with acute pain with 
co-existing depression, however, further investigations are needed.
DOI: 10.1016/s1734-1140(12)70932-5
PMID: 23406745 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Low concentrations of C<sub>6</sub>‐substituted purines retard the G<sub>0</sub>‐→G<sub>1</sub> transition of bovine lens epithelium cells 1. FEBS Lett. 1975 Dec 1;60(1):205-9. doi: 10.1016/0014-5793(75)80452-2.

Low concentrations of C6-substituted purines retard the G0 leads to G1 
transition of bovine lens epithelium cells.

Glässer D
 Iwig M.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-5793(75)80452-2
PMID: 1227956 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of mitochondrial electron transport complex I in coenzyme Q<sub>1</sub>reduction by intact pulmonary arterial endothelial cells and the effect of hyperoxia <jats:p>The objective was to determine the impact of intact normoxic and hyperoxia-exposed (95% O<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>for 48 h) bovine pulmonary arterial endothelial cells in culture on the redox status of the coenzyme Q<jats:sub>10</jats:sub>homolog coenzyme Q<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>(CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>). When CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>(50 μM) was incubated with the cells for 30 min
 its concentration in the medium decreased over time, reaching a lower level for normoxic than hyperoxia-exposed cells.
The decreases in CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>concentration were associated with generation of CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>hydroquinone (CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>), wherein 3.4 times more CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>was produced in the normoxic than hyperoxia-exposed cell medium (8.2 ± 0.3 and 2.4 ± 0.4 μM, means ± SE, respectively) after 30 min.
The maximum CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>reduction rate for the hyperoxia-exposed cells, measured using the cell membrane-impermeant redox indicator potassium ferricyanide, was about one-half that of normoxic cells (11.4 and 24.1 nmol·min<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>·mg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>cell protein, respectively).
The mitochondrial electron transport complex I inhibitor rotenone decreased the CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>reduction rate by 85% in the normoxic cells and 44% in the hyperoxia-exposed cells.
There was little or no inhibitory effect of NAD(P)H:quinone oxidoreductase 1 (NQO1) inhibitors on CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>reduction.
Intact cell oxygen consumption rates and complex I activities in mitochondria-enriched fractions were also lower for hyperoxia-exposed than normoxic cells.
The implication is that intact pulmonary endothelial cells influence the redox status of CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>via complex I-mediated reduction to CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>, which appears in the extracellular medium, and that the hyperoxic exposure decreases the overall CoQ<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>reduction capacity via a depression in complex I activity.</jats:p>
The effect of amphetamine and tyramine on the guinea-pig urinary bladder 1. Agents Actions. 1970 Aug;1(4):164-71. doi: 10.1007/BF01965757.

The effect of amphetamine and tyramine on the guinea-pig urinary bladder.

Hawke DM
 Chesher GB.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01965757
PMID: 4398596 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selective cholinergic immunolesioning affects synaptic plasticity in developing visual cortex <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Cholinergic neurotransmission is known to affect activity‐dependent plasticity in various areas
 including the visual cortex.
However, relatively little is known about the exact role of subcortical cholinergic inputs in the regulation of plastic events in this region during early postnatal development.
In the present study, synaptic transmission and plasticity in the developing visual cortex were studied following selective immunotoxic removal of the basal forebrain cholinergic afferents in 4‐day‐old rat pups.
The lesion produced dramatic cholinergic neuronal and terminal fibre loss associated with decreased mRNA levels for the M<jats:sub>1</jats:sub> and M<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> muscarinic receptors, as well as clear‐cut impairments of long‐term potentiation (LTP) in visual cortex slices.
Indeed, after theta burst stimulation of layer IV a long‐term depression (LTD) instead of an LTP was induced in immunolesioned slices.
This functional change appears to be due to the lack of cholinergic input as exogenous application of acetylcholine prevented the shift from LTP to LTD.
In addition, lesioned rats showed an increased sensitivity to acetylcholine (ACh).
While application of 20 µ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc> ACh produced a depression of the field potential in immunolesioned rat slices, in order to observe the same effect in control slices we had to increase ACh concentration to up to 200 µ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>.
Taken together, our results indicate that deprivation of cholinergic input affects synaptic transmission and plasticity in developing visual cortex, suggesting that the cholinergic system could play an active role in the refinement of the cortical circuitry during maturation.</jats:p>
Pet therapy and institutionalized elderly: A study on 144 cognitively unimpaired subjects 1. Arch Gerontol Geriatr. 2006 Mar-Apr;42(2):207-16. doi: 
10.1016/j.archger.2005.06.011. Epub 2005 Sep 26.

Pet therapy and institutionalized elderly: a study on 144 cognitively unimpaired 
subjects.

Colombo G(1)
 Buono MD, Smania K, Raviola R, De Leo D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of Padua, Via Giustiniani, 2, 35100 
Padua, Italy.
graziella.arpa@unipd.it

The aim of this study was to assess whether a pet therapy program had a 
favorable effect on psychopathological status and perception of quality of life 
in cognitively unimpaired institutionalized elderly.
Seven elderly rest homes in 
Veneto Region of Northern Italy participated in the project, which was conducted 
on 144 cognitively intact elderly residents (97 females and 47 males).
The 
participants were randomly divided into three groups: 48 subjects were given a 
canary, 43 subjects were given a plant, and 53 subjects were given nothing.
The 
observation period (t0-t1) lasted for 3 months.
At time t0 and t1 participants 
were administered the mini mental state examination (MMSE) to assess their 
cognitive status, the LEIPAD II-Short Version (LEIPAD-SV), to gauge subjective 
perception of quality of life in the elderly, and the brief symptom inventory 
(BSI), for self-evaluation of the presence of psychopathological symptoms.
At 
the end of the 3-month trial, tests were re-administered, without removing the 
experimental condition.
Even if the group that received a plant seemed to 
benefit from the experience, they did not achieve the same positive results on 
BSI and quality of life subscales exhibited by the group that received a pet.
This study reinforces the hypothesis that pet therapy may have a beneficial 
effect on the psychological well being of institutionalized elderly, in 
particular on aspects related to depressive symptoms and perception of quality 
of life.
DOI: 10.1016/j.archger.2005.06.011
PMID: 16191447 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of steroid hydroxylase inhibitors on the rate of reduction of adrenal mitochondrial cytochrome P-450 1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 1969 Aug 15;36(4):552-8. doi: 
10.1016/0006-291x(69)90340-4.

The effect of steroid hydroxylase inhibitors on the rate of reduction of adrenal 
mitochondrial cytochrome P-450.

McIntosh EN
 Salhanick HA.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-291x(69)90340-4
PMID: 5809704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Neurophysiological studies with 7-chloro-1
3-dihydro-3-hydroxy-5-phenyl-2H-1,4-benzodiazepin-2-on in animal experiments].
1.
Arzneimittelforschung.
1967 Aug;17(8):1057-60.
[Neurophysiological studies with 
7-chloro-1,3-dihydro-3-hydroxy-5-phenyl-2H-1,4-benzodiazepin-2-on in animal 
experiments].
[Article in German]

Dolce G, Kaemmerer E.

PMID: 5632062 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Energy Turnover in the Normoxic and Anoxic Turtle Heart 1. Comp Biochem Physiol A Physiol. 1997 May;117(1):121-6. doi: 
10.1016/s0300-9629(96)00283-6.

Energy turnover in the normoxic and anoxic turtle heart.

Arthur PG(1)
 Franklin CE, Cousins KL, Thorarensen H, Hochachka PW, Farrell AP.
Author information:
(1)Department of Zoology, University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.
parthur@cyllene.uva.edu.ad

We examined the possibility that the heart of the tuttle Chrysemys scripta is an 
exceptional anaerobic performer, by measuring myocardial power output, lactate 
output, and estimated ATP turnover in perfused heart preparations.
Over a range 
of myocardial power outputs at 5 and 15 degrees C we find that turtle hearts 
perfused with anoxic saline do not show a particularly outstanding ability to 
produce ATP anaerobically.
Furthermore, at 15 degrees C anoxia reduced the ATP 
turnover rate to 50% of the normoxic rate.
At 5 degrees C the anoxia-induced 
depression of ATP turnover was even more pronounced, being 4-fold lower than the 
normoxic rate.
In addition, anoxia at 5 degrees C reduced the basal metabolic 
rate of the tuttle heart.
We conclude that long-term cardiac tolerance of 
hypoxia in this species is more likely related to metabolic depression rather 
than to an exceptional anaerobic performance.
DOI: 10.1016/s0300-9629(96)00283-6
PMID: 9185339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Effect on Total Renal and Tubular Function and Plasma Renin of a Moderate Isotonic Saline Load in Rats Anesthetized with Amytal and Inactin <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The renal effects of i.v. saline loading equal to 1% body weight (b.wt.) were studied in 2 groups of rats:<jats:italic>group I</jats:italic>was anesthetized with Amytal (15 mg/100 g b.wt. plus supplementary doses)
<jats:italic>group II</jats:italic>with Inactin (12.5–15.0 mg/100 g b.wt).<jats:italic>In group I</jats:italic>the saline load caused an increase in urine flow (+ 92%), solute excretion (+ 67%), inulin clearance (C<jats:sub>IN</jats:sub>) (+ 24%), PAH clearance (+ 31%) and absolute proximal reabsorption rate (+ 27%).
Proximal fractional reabsorption and filtration fraction (FF) remained unchanged, while plasma oncotic pressure (COP) decreased by 10%.
Plasma renin fell and there was an inverse relationship between renin concentration and proximal reabsorption rate.
In<jats:italic>group II</jats:italic>urine flow and solute excretion increased after saline (+ 85% and 110%, respectively); C<jats:sub>IN</jats:sub>and absolute proximal reabsorption rate was lower than in group I and failed to increase after saline.
Proximal fractional reabsorption was also lower and decreased after saline.
COP as well as renin decreased as in group I, but no relationship between renin concentration and proximal reabsorption rate could be demonstrated.
The data indicate that Inactin depresses both resting proximal tubular reabsorptive capacity and the tubular response to a physiological volume expansion.
The results are compatible with the hypothesis that the renin‐angiotensin system is significantly involved in regulation of proximal tubular function, while they are incompatible with the idea that peritubular COP plays any major role in this adjustment.</jats:p>
Evaluation of distillers dried grains with solubles as a feed ingredient for broilers 1. Poult Sci. 2004 Nov;83(11):1891-6. doi: 10.1093/ps/83.11.1891.

Evaluation of distillers dried grains with solubles as a feed ingredient for 
broilers.

Lumpkins BS(1)
 Batal AB, Dale NM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Poultry Sciences, University of Georgia, Athens, Georgia 30602, 
USA.
Two experiments were conducted to evaluate the use of distillers dried grains 
with solubles (DDGS) from modern ethanol plants in broiler diets.
Experiment 1 
was a 2 x 2 factorial experiment with diets containing 2 levels of DDGS (0 and 
15%) and 2 diet densities (high and low).
The high- and low-density diets were 
formulated to contain 22% CP and 3,050 kcal MEn/kg and 20% CP and 3,000 kcal 
MEn/kg, respectively.
Eight pens of 6 chicks were fed an experimental diet from 
0 to 18 d of age.
Weight gain and feed efficiency (gain:feed ratio) of the 
chicks receiving the high-density diets were (P < 0.05) better than those of 
chicks fed the low-density diets.
However, within the 2 density levels there was 
no difference in performance of chicks fed diets with 0 or 15% DDGS.
In 
experiment 2, 6 replications of 50 chicks were fed 1 of 4 dietary treatments for 
42 d. The diets were formulated to be isocaloric and isonitrogenous and 
contained 0, 6, 12, or 18% DDGS.
There was no significant difference in 
performance or carcass yield throughout the 42 d experiment except for a 
depression in BW gain and feed conversion when chicks were fed diets with 18% 
DDGS in the starter period.
These studies indicate that DDGS from modern ethanol 
plants is an acceptable feed ingredient for broiler diets and can be safely used 
at 6% in the starter period and 12 to 15% in the grower and finisher periods.
DOI: 10.1093/ps/83.11.1891
PMID: 15554067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Calcium channel block by phenytoin in neuroblastoma x glioma hybrid cells. 1. Biomed Biochim Acta. 1985;44(7-8):1229-37.

Calcium channel block by phenytoin in neuroblastoma x glioma hybrid cells.

Bodewei R
 Hering S, Schubert B, Winkler J, Wollenberger A.
The action of phenytoin on the inward calcium current (ICa) was studied in cells 
of the clonal mouse neuroblastoma X rat glioma hybrid line 108CC5 by the suction 
pipette technique for internal perfusion and voltage clamp.
The ICa was recorded 
after suppression of Na+ and K+ currents.
Phenytoin, applied externally in 
concentrations of 50 to 500 microM, depressed the ICa in the investigated 
potential range of -60 to +30 mV in a concentration-dependent manner.
When the 
cells were stimulated by depolarizing clamp steps, the extent of the ICa 
depression increased with the frequency and duration of the activating pulses.
ICa was also inhibited on intracellular application of phenytoin.
PMID: 2417595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dose and timing effect of etomidate on motor evoked potentials elicited by transcranial electric or magnetic stimulation in the monkey and baboon 1. J Clin Monit Comput. 2009 Aug;23(4):253-61. doi: 10.1007/s10877-009-9190-z.
Epub  2009 Jul 12.

Dose and timing effect of etomidate on motor evoked potentials elicited by 
transcranial electric or magnetic stimulation in the monkey and baboon.

Sloan T(1)
 Rogers J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Colorado at Denver, Aurora, CO 
80045, USA.
tod.sloan@ucdenver.edu

OBJECTIVE: Etomidate has been shown to both enhance and depress the cortical 
amplitude of somatosensory evoked potentials (SSEP) depending on the dose used.
Similar amplitude increases with etomidate and motor evoked potentials resulting 
from cortical magnetic (tcMMEP) and electric (tcEMEP) stimulation have not been 
consistent.
We used a primate model to elucidate the time and dose 
characteristics of the effect.
METHODS: tcMMEP and tcEMEP were characterized during bolus injections of 0.1-1.8 
mg/kg etomidate in 10 adult cynomologous monkeys during a baseline anesthesia 
with a continuous ketamine infusion.
Responses were assessed by measuring the 
amplitude and onset latency of the hypothenar compound action potential 
response.
In a second experiment the epidural and hypothenar response to tcEMEP 
was recorded under 0.3% isoflurane anesthesia and following intravenous 
injection of 0.05-0.35 mg/kg etomidate.
Cortical stimulation was accomplished 
using a Cadwell MES-10 (tcMMEP) and Digitimer D180 (tcEMEP).
RESULTS: The amplitude of the hypothenar muscle response was increased for 
tcEMEP and tcMMEP at 20 min following 0.1 mg/kg etomidate in the monkey.
The 
amplification of the tcMMEP response was significantly greater than the tcEMEP 
response (1.95 + 0.62 SD vs. 1.43 + 0.68 SD, P = 0.023).
Responses at higher 
doses were all below baseline.
The tcMMEP response was significantly smaller 
than the tcEMEP at doses above 0.9 mg/kg (all P<0.001).
The onset latency values 
were not significantly increased at any dose or time.
The epidural recording 
demonstrated a large increase in the number of I waves compared to the 
isoflurane baseline.
CONCLUSIONS: This study demonstrates that a low dose (0.1 mg/kg) of etomidate 
increases the com- pound muscle action potential (CMAP) amplitude for tcEMEP and 
tcMMEP in the monkey whereas higher doses decrease the amplitude.
Epidural 
recordings demonstrate a marked increase in the number of I waves consistent 
with a cortical effect similar to the postulated effect that results in 
amplification of the cortical SSEP.
This suggests the amplitude loss in the 
hypothenar muscles may be due to depression of the spinal cord by etomidate.
The 
CMAP response amplification at low doses was greater in tcMMEP than tcEMEP and 
the depression at higher doses was more with the tcMMEP technique consistent 
with the greater dependence of the tcMMEP technique on synaptic activation.
DOI: 10.1007/s10877-009-9190-z
PMID: 19597748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
On the potential role of glutamate transport in mental fatigue. 1. J Neuroinflammation. 2004 Nov 4;1(1):22. doi: 10.1186/1742-2094-1-22.

On the potential role of glutamate transport in mental fatigue.

Rönnbäck L(1)
 Hansson E.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Neuroscience, Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden.
lars.ronnback@neuro.gu.se.
Mental fatigue, with decreased concentration capacity, is common in 
neuroinflammatory and neurodegenerative diseases, often appearing prior to other 
major mental or physical neurological symptoms.
Mental fatigue also makes 
rehabilitation more difficult after a stroke, brain trauma, meningitis or 
encephalitis.
As increased levels of proinflammatory cytokines are reported in 
these disorders, we wanted to explore whether or not proinflammatory cytokines 
could induce mental fatigue, and if so, by what mechanisms.It is well known that 
proinflammatory cytokines are increased in major depression, "sickness behavior" 
and sleep deprivation, which are all disorders associated with mental fatigue.
Furthermore, an influence by specific proinflammatory cytokines, such as 
interleukin (IL)-1, on learning and memory capacities has been observed in 
several experimental systems.
As glutamate signaling is crucial for information 
intake and processing within the brain, and due to the pivotal role for 
glutamate in brain metabolism, dynamic alterations in glutamate transmission 
could be of pathophysiological importance in mental fatigue.
Based on this 
literature and observations from our own laboratory and others on the role of 
astroglial cells in the fine-tuning of glutamate neurotransmission we present 
the hypothesis that the proinflammatory cytokines tumor necrosis factor-alpha, 
IL-1beta and IL-6 could be involved in the pathophysiology of mental fatigue 
through their ability to attenuate the astroglial clearance of extracellular 
glutamate, their disintegration of the blood brain barrier, and effects on 
astroglial metabolism and metabolic supply for the neurons, thereby attenuating 
glutamate transmission.
To test whether our hypothesis is valid or not, brain 
imaging techniques should be applied with the ability to register, over time and 
with increasing cognitive loading, the extracellular concentrations of glutamate 
and potassium (K+) in humans suffering from mental fatigue.
At present, this is 
not possible for technical reasons.
Therefore, more knowledge of neuronal-glial 
signaling in in vitro systems and animal experiments is important.In summary, we 
provide a hypothetic explanation for a general neurobiological mechanism, at the 
cellular level, behind one of our most common symptoms during neuroinflammation 
and other long-term disorders of brain function.
Understanding 
pathophysiological mechanisms of mental fatigue could result in better 
treatment.
DOI: 10.1186/1742-2094-1-22
PMCID: PMC533886
PMID: 15527505
Hormone-Induced Synthesis of DNA by Mammary Gland<i>in Vitro</i> 1. Endocrinology. 1968 Mar;82(3):540-6. doi: 10.1210/endo-82-3-540.

Hormone-induced synthesis of DNA by mammary gland in vitro.

Turkington RW.

DOI: 10.1210/endo-82-3-540
PMID: 5641545 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of long-term treatment with the α2-adrenoceptor antagonist mirtazapine on 5-HT neurotransmission 1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1997 Jan;355(1):20-9. doi: 
10.1007/pl00004913.

Effects of long-term treatment with the alpha 2-adrenoceptor antagonist 
mirtazapine on 5-HT neurotransmission.

Haddjeri N(1)
 Blier P, de Montigny C.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiological Psychiatry Unit, McGill University, Montréal, Québec, Canada.
Mirtazapine (ORG 3770, Remeron) is a nonselective alpha 2-adrenoceptor 
antagonist with antidepressant activity in major depression.
The aim of the 
present study was to assess, using an in vivo electrophysiological paradigm, the 
effect of long-term treatment with mirtazapine on pre- and postsynaptic alpha 
2-adrenoceptors and on 5-HT neurotransmission in male Sprague-Dawley rats.
A 
21-day treatment with mirtazapine (5 mg/kg/day, s.c., using osmotic minipumps) 
increased the spontaneous firing activity of locus coeruleus noradrenaline (NA) 
neurons.
Their firing activity was back to normal 48 h after removing the 
minipump.
However, this treatment did not modify the dose-response curve of the 
suppressant effect of the alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist clonidine on the firing 
activity of NA neurons.
The spontaneous firing activity of dorsal raphe 5-HT 
neurons was also markedly increased in mirtazapine-treated rats, and was back to 
normal 48 h after removing of the minipump.
The dose-response curve of the 
suppressant effect of clonidine on the firing activity of 5-HT neurons was 
altered in mirtazapine-treated rats.
Furthermore, it was further shifted to the 
left after a 48-h washout.
Long-term mirtazapine treatment did not modify the 
suppressant effects of microiontophoretically-applied NA and 5-HT on the firing 
activity of CA3 dorsal hippocampus pyramidal neurons.
However, this mirtazapine 
treatment antagonized both the enhancing effect of a low dose (10 micrograms/kg, 
i.v.)
and the reducing effect of a high dose (100 micrograms/kg, i.v.)
of the 
alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist clonidine on the effectiveness of the electrical 
stimulation of the ascending 5-HT pathway in suppressing the firing activity of 
dorsal hippocampus CA3 pyramidal neurons.
After a 48-h washout, only the effect 
of the high dose of clonidine was attenuated, suggesting a desensitization of 
the terminal alpha 2-adrenergic heteroreceptor, but not of the terminal alpha 
2-adrenergic autoreceptor.
The decrease in the effectiveness of the stimulation 
upon increasing its frequency from 1 to 5 Hz (due to the activation of terminal 
5-HT autoreceptors) was unaltered after the long-term mirtazapine treatment.
In 
conclusion, the tonic activation of postsynaptic 5-HT receptor is enhanced by a 
21-day treatment with mirtazapine, as a result of a sustained increase in 5-HT 
neuron firing activity in the presence of decreased function of alpha 
2-adrenergic heteroreceptors located on 5-HT terminals in the dorsal 
hippocampus.
DOI: 10.1007/pl00004913
PMID: 9007838 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reduction of dopamine-related transcription factors Nurr1 and NGFI-B in the prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia and bipolar disorders 1. Schizophr Res. 2006 May;84(1):36-56. doi: 10.1016/j.schres.2005.11.006. Epub 
2006 May 2.

Reduction of dopamine-related transcription factors Nurr1 and NGFI-B in the 
prefrontal cortex in schizophrenia and bipolar disorders.

Xing G(1)
 Zhang L, Russell S, Post R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland 20814-4799, USA.
gxing@usuhs.mil

Abnormal cortical and subcortical dopaminergic activities are among the most 
consistent neuropathological findings in schizophrenia.
The molecular mechanisms 
remain unspecified.
NGFI-B and Nurr1 are two closely related transcription 
factors involved in dopaminergic cell differentiation, maturation, and 
apoptosis.
NGFI-B knockout mice show attenuated behavioral response to dopamine 
receptor agonists, whereas Nurr1 knockout disrupts midbrain dopaminergic neuron 
development.
To further understand the role of Nurr1 and NGFI-B in schizophrenia 
and bipolar disorders, we measured Nurr1 and NGFI-B mRNA in the prefrontal 
cortex Brodmann's areas 9 (BA 9) and BA 46 by in situ hybridization, and the 
protein levels in BA 9 by Western blotting, of patients with schizophrenia, 
major depression, and bipolar disorders, and non-psychiatric control subjects 
(n=15 per group).
NGFI-B mRNA (P<0.05) and protein (P<0.01) were significantly 
lower in patients with schizophrenia (BA 9), and NGFI-B mRNA was lower in 
bipolar disorder (BA 9 and BA 46) than in the controls.
In the deep cortical 
layers of BA 46, Nurr1 mRNA was significantly (P<0.05) lower in patients with 
bipolar disorder and schizophrenia than in the controls.
Nurr1 protein in BA 9 
was significantly lower in major depression (P<0.05) and lower at a trend level 
in schizophrenia (P=0.056) than in the controls.
These data show a deficient 
prefrontal NGFI-B and Nurr1 expression in schizophrenia and bipolar disorder.
Further study may elucidate if and how these deficiencies could be associated 
with abnormal dopaminergic functions seen in both illnesses.
DOI: 10.1016/j.schres.2005.11.006
PMID: 16631355 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Psychopharmacological approach to psychosomatic medicine. Experimental and clinical research. 1. Acta Neurol Latinoam. 1967;13(1):239-48.

Psychopharmacological approach to psychosomatic medicine. Experimental and 
clinical research.

Marino A.

PMID: 5633056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressants differentially modify the extinction of an aversive memory task in female rats 1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2012 Apr 27;37(1):33-40. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.01.012. Epub 2012 Jan 28.

Antidepressants differentially modify the extinction of an aversive memory task 
in female rats.

Melo TG(1)
 Izídio GS, Ferreira LS, Sousa DS, Macedo PT, Cabral A, Ribeiro AM, 
Silva RH.
Author information:
(1)Memory Studies Laboratory, Physiology Department, Federal University of Rio 
Grande of Norte, Natal, Brazil.
Treatment of major depression, posttraumatic stress disorder and other 
psychopathologies with antidepressants can be associated with improvement of the 
cognitive deficits related to these disorders.
Although the mechanisms of these 
effects are not completely elucidated, alterations in the extinction of aversive 
memories are believed to play a role in these psychopathologies.
We have 
recently verified that female rats present low levels of extinction when 
submitted to the plus-maze discriminative avoidance task.
In the present study, 
female rats were treated long term with clinically used antidepressants 
(fluoxetine, nortriptyline or mirtazapine) and subjected to the plus-maze 
discriminative avoidance task to evaluate learning, memory, extinction and 
anxiety-related behaviors as well as behavioral despair in the forced swimming 
test.
All groups learned the task and exhibited retrieval.
Chronic treatment 
with fluoxetine (but not with the other antidepressants tested) increased 
extinction of the discriminative task.
In the forced swimming test, the animals 
treated with fluoxetine and mirtazapine showed decreased immobility duration.
In 
conclusion, fluoxetine potentiated extinction, while both fluoxetine and 
mirtazapine were effective in ameliorating depressive-like behavior in the 
forced swimming test, suggesting a possible dissociation between the effects on 
mood and the extinction of aversive memories in female rats.
Copyright Â© 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.01.012
PMID: 22310225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Neurogranin/RC3 Enhances Long-Term Potentiation and Learning by Promoting Calcium-Mediated Signaling <jats:p>In neurons
 neurogranin (Ng) binds calmodulin (CaM), and its binding affinity is reduced by increasing Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>, phosphorylation by PKC, or oxidation by oxidants.
Ng concentration in the hippocampus of adult mice varied broadly (Ng<jats:sup>+/+</jats:sup>, ∼160-370 and Ng<jats:sup>+/-</jats:sup>, ∼70-230 pmol/mg); the level in Ng<jats:sup>+/+</jats:sup>mice is one of the highest among all neuronal CaM-binding proteins.
Among Ng<jats:sup>+/-</jats:sup>mice, but less apparent in Ng<jats:sup>+/+</jats:sup>, a significant relationship existed between their hippocampal levels of Ng and performances in the Morris water maze.
Ng<jats:sup>-/-</jats:sup>mice performed poorly in this task; they also displayed deficits in high-frequency-induced long-term potentiation (LTP) in area CA1 of hippocampal slices, whereas low-frequency-induced long-term depression was enhanced.
Thus, compared with Ng<jats:sup>+/+</jats:sup>mice, the frequency-response curve of Ng<jats:sup>-/-</jats:sup>shifted to the right.
Paired-pulse facilitation and synaptic fatigue during prolonged stimulation at 10 Hz (900 pulses) were unchanged in Ng<jats:sup>-/-</jats:sup>slices, indicating their normal presynaptic function.
Measurements of Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>transients in CA1 pyramidal neurons after weak and strong tetanic stimulations (100 Hz, 400 and 1000 msec, respectively) revealed a significantly greater intracellular Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>([Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>]<jats:sub>i</jats:sub>) response in Ng<jats:sup>+/+</jats:sup>compared with Ng<jats:sup>-/-</jats:sup>mice, but the decay time constants did not differ.
The diminished Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>dynamics in Ng<jats:sup>-/-</jats:sup>mice are a likely cause of their decreased propensity to undergo LTP.
Thus, Ng may promote a high [Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>]<jats:sub>i</jats:sub>by a “mass-action” mechanism; namely, the higher the Ng concentration, the more Ng-CaM complexes will be formed, which effectively raises [Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>]<jats:sub>i</jats:sub>at any given Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>influx.
This mechanism provides potent signal amplification in enhancing synaptic plasticity as well as learning and memory.</jats:p>
Compensatory proteome adjustments imply tissue-specific structural and metabolic reorganization following episodic hypoxia or anoxia in the epaulette shark (Hemiscyllium ocellatum) <jats:p>The epaulette shark ( Hemiscyllium ocellatum ) represents an ancestral vertebrate model of episodic hypoxia and anoxia tolerance at tropical temperatures. We used two-dimensional gel electrophoresis and mass spectrometry-based proteomics approaches
 combined with a suite of physiological measures, to characterize this species' responses to 1) one episode of anoxia plus normoxic recovery, 2) one episode of severe hypoxia plus recovery, or 3) two episodes of severe hypoxia plus recovery.
We examined these responses in the cerebellum and rectal gland, two tissues with high ATP requirements.
Sharks maintained plasma ionic homeostasis following all treatments, and activities of Na<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>/K<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>-ATPase and caspase 3/7 in both tissues were unchanged.
Oxygen lack and reoxygenation elicited subtle adjustments in the proteome.
Hypoxia led to more extensive proteome responses than anoxia in both tissues.
The cerebellum and rectal gland exhibited treatment-specific responses to oxygen limitation consistent with one or more of several strategies: 1) neurotransmitter and receptor downregulation in cerebellum to prevent excitotoxicity, 2) cytoskeletal/membrane reorganization, 3) metabolic reorganization and more efficient intracellular energy shuttling that are more consistent with sustained ATP turnover than with long-term metabolic depression, 4) detoxification of metabolic byproducts and oxidative stress in light of continued metabolic activity, particularly following hypoxia in rectal gland, and 5) activation of prosurvival signaling.
We hypothesize that neuronal morphological changes facilitate prolonged protection from excitotoxicity via dendritic spine remodeling in cerebellum (i.e., synaptic structural plasticity).
These results recapitulate several highly conserved themes in the anoxia and hypoxia tolerance, preconditioning, and oxidative stress literature in a single system.
In addition, several of the identified pathways and proteins suggest potentially novel mechanisms for enhancing anoxia or hypoxia tolerance in vertebrates.
Overall, our data show that episodic hypoxic or anoxic exposure and recovery in the epaulette shark amplifies a constitutive suite of compensatory mechanisms that further prepares them for subsequent insults.</jats:p>
Effects of ginsenosides on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function and brain-derived neurotrophic factor in rats exposed to chronic unpredictable mild stress 1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2011 May;36(10):1342-7.

[Effects of ginsenosides on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal function and 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor in rats exposed to chronic unpredictable mild 
stress].

[Article in Chinese]

Liu L(1)
 Luo Y, Zhang R, Guo J.
Author information:
(1)Integrated Chinese and Western Medicine Hospital of Zhejiang Province, 
Hangzhou 310003, China.
1367146576@qq.com

Gingseng is commonly used in traditional Chinese medicine community for the 
treatment of depression-like disorders.
Ginsenosides is considered to be the 
major active components of ginseng.
Previous studies have demonstrated that 
ginsenosides produced antidepressant-like action in various mouse models of 
behavioral despair.
The present study aimed to examine whether ginsenosides 
could affect the chronic unpredictable mild stress (CUMS)-induced depression in 
rats.
The mechanism(s) underlying the antidepressant-like action was 
investigated by measuring serum corticosterone level, glucocorticoid receptor 
(GR), mineralocorticoid receptor (MR) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF) mRNA levels in brain tissues.
CUMS, being lasted for 6 weeks, caused 
depression-like behavior in rats, as indicated by the significant decrease in 
sucrose consumption and increase in immobility time in the forced swim test.
Whereas serum corticosterone level was significantly increased in rats exposed 
to CUMS, expressions of GR mRNA in hippocampus, and BDNF mRNA in hippocampus and 
frontal cortex, were decreased in CUMS-treated rats.
Daily intragastric 
administration of ginsenosides (12.5, 25, 50 mg x kg(-1)) during the six weeks 
of CUMS significantly suppressed behavioral and biochemical changes induced by 
CUMS.
However, there was no significant difference in MR mRNA level among 
groups.
The results suggest that the antidepressant-like action of ginsenosides 
is likely mediated by modulating the function of hypothalamic- pituitary 
-adrenal axis and increasing the expression of BDNF in brain tissues.
PMID: 21837980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Efficacy and safety of subcutaneous interferon beta-1a in relapsing–remitting multiple sclerosis: Further outcomes from the IMPROVE study 1. J Neurol Sci. 2012 Jan 15;312(1-2):97-101. doi: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.08.013.
Epub  2011 Aug 31.

Efficacy and safety of subcutaneous interferon β-1a in relapsing-remitting 
multiple sclerosis: further outcomes from the IMPROVE study.

De Stefano N(1)
 Sormani MP, Stubinski B, Blevins G, Drulovic JS, Issard D, 
Shotekov P, Gasperini C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological and Behavioral Sciences, University of Siena, 
Siena, Italy.
destefano@unisi.it

BACKGROUND: The IMPROVE study demonstrated that the fetal bovine serum (FBS)- 
and human serum albumin (HSA)-free formulation of subcutaneous (sc) interferon 
(IFN) beta-1a had beneficial effects on the numbers of combined unique active 
magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) lesions in relapsing-remitting multiple 
sclerosis (RRMS).
Here we report additional MRI endpoints (including post hoc 
analyses), and clinical efficacy, safety, and immunogenicity outcomes.
METHODS: Patients with active RRMS were randomized (2:1) to IFN beta-1a, 44 mcg 
sc three times weekly (tiw) (n=120), or placebo (n=60), for 16 weeks 
(double-blind phase).
All patients then received IFN beta-1a, 44 mcg sc tiw, for 
24 weeks (rater-blind phase).
Patients underwent MRI brain scans every 4 weeks.
RESULTS: Compared with placebo, there was a 68% reduction in the mean cumulative 
number of new gadolinium-enhancing lesions with IFN beta-1a as early as week 4 
(p<0.001), and a 53% reduction in the mean cumulative number of new T2 lesions 
as early as week 8 (p=0.025; post hoc analyses).
During the 16-week double-blind 
phase, the relapse rate was 0.14 (95% confidence interval [CI] 0.09-0.23) with 
IFN beta-1a and 0.33 (95% CI 0.22-0.52) with placebo (p=0.010).
Safety outcomes 
were consistent with those expected with IFN-beta treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: The FBS/HSA-free formulation of sc IFN beta-1a has a beneficial 
impact on MRI and efficacy outcomes as early as 4 weeks after treatment 
initiation in patients with RRMS and has a safety profile consistent with 
previous trials of sc IFN beta-1a.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jns.2011.08.013
PMID: 21880336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In vitro study of effect of 2-thio-4-hydrazino-pyrimidine on final stages of biosynthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides and RNA synthesis. 1. C R Acad Bulg Sci. 1977;30(1):93-5.

In vitro study of effect of 2-thio-4-hydrazino-pyrimidine on final stages of 
biosynthesis of pyrimidine nucleotides and RNA synthesis.

Spassovska NC
 Genchev DD, Dabeva MD.
PMID: 852400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cariprazine: New dopamine biased agonist for neuropsychiatric
disorders 1. Drugs Today (Barc). 2016 Feb;52(2):97-110. doi: 10.1358/dot.2016.52.2.2461868.

Cariprazine:New dopamine biased agonist for neuropsychiatric disorders.

De Deurwaerdère P(1).

Author information:
(1)CNRS
 Institut des Maladies Neurodégénératives, Bordeaux, France.
deurwaer@u-bordeaux.fr.
Cariprazine (RGH-188, MP-214, Vraylar[TM]) is a new dopamine receptor ligand 
developed for the treatment of several neuropsychiatric diseases including 
schizophrenia and bipolar disorders.
Cariprazine displays higher affinity at 
dopamine D3 receptors and a similar affinity at D2 and 5-HT2B receptors.
At 
variance with some atypical antipsychotics, its affinity at 5-HT1A, 5-HT2A and 
histamine H1 receptors is modest compared with its three main targets.
Cariprazine could correspond to a biased agonist at dopamine receptors, 
displaying either antagonist or partial agonist properties depending on the 
signaling pathways linked to D2/D3 receptors.
The compound crosses the 
blood-brain barrier, as revealed by positron emission tomography and 
pharmacokinetic studies in various species.
Two main metabolites result mainly 
from the activity of CYP34A and display properties similar to those of the 
parent drug.
Behavioral data report that cariprazine is efficacious in animal 
models addressing positive, negative and cognitive symptoms of schizophrenia 
with no extrapyramidal side effects.
In September 2015, the FDA approved the use 
of cariprazine for the treatment of schizophrenia and type I bipolar disorder.
The efficacy of cariprazine in other neuropsychiatric diseases is currently 
being evaluated in preclinical and clinical studies.
Side effects have been 
observed in humans, including extrapyramidal side effects and akathisia of mild 
to moderate intensity.
Copyright 2016 Prous Science, S.A.U.
or its licensors.
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1358/dot.2016.52.2.2461868
PMID: 27092339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin by rapamycin modulates cognitive and non-cognitive components of behavior throughout lifespan in mice 1. Neuroscience. 2012 Oct 25;223:102-13. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.06.054.
 Epub 2012 Jun 28.

Chronic inhibition of mammalian target of rapamycin by rapamycin modulates 
cognitive and non-cognitive components of behavior throughout lifespan in mice.

Halloran J(1)
 Hussong SA, Burbank R, Podlutskaya N, Fischer KE, Sloane LB, 
Austad SN, Strong R, Richardson A, Hart MJ, Galvan V.

Author information:
(1)Barshop Institute, University of Texas Health Science Center at San Antonio, 
15355 Lambda Drive, San Antonio, TX 78245, United States.
Erratum in
    Neuroscience.
2015 Oct 15;306():151.
Aging is, by far, the greatest risk factor for most neurodegenerative diseases.
In non-diseased conditions, normal aging can also be associated with declines in 
cognitive function that significantly affect quality of life in the elderly.
It 
was recently shown that inhibition of Mammalian TOR (mTOR) activity in mice by 
chronic rapamycin treatment extends lifespan, possibly by delaying aging 
{Harrison, 2009 #4}{Miller, 2011 #168}.
To explore the effect of chronic 
rapamycin treatment on normal brain aging we determined cognitive and 
non-cognitive components of behavior throughout lifespan in male and female 
C57BL/6 mice that were fed control- or rapamycin-supplemented chow.
Our studies 
show that rapamycin enhances cognitive function in young adult mice and blocks 
age-associated cognitive decline in older animals.
In addition, mice fed with 
rapamycin-supplemented chow showed decreased anxiety and depressive-like 
behavior at all ages tested.
Levels of three major monoamines (norepinephrine, 
dopamine and 5-hydroxytryptamine) and their metabolites 
(3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid, homovanillic acid, and 5-hydroxyindolacetic 
acid) were significantly augmented in midbrain of rapamycin-treated mice 
compared to controls.
Our results suggest that chronic, partial inhibition of 
mTOR by oral rapamycin enhances learning and memory in young adults, maintains 
memory in old C57BL/6J mice, and has concomitant anxiolytic and 
antidepressant-like effects, possibly by stimulating major monoamine pathways in 
brain.
Copyright © 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.06.054
PMCID: PMC3454865
PMID: 22750207 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of dimorpholamine on frog sciatic nerve-sartorius preparation 1. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1979 Jun;29(3):457-66. doi: 10.1254/jjp.29.457.

Effects of dimorpholamine on frog sciatic nerve-sartorius preparation.

Hironaka T
 Morimoto S.

The present study describes the potentiating effect of dimorpholamine on twitch 
contraction of skeletal muscle and its mechanism on a cellular basis.
Low 
concentrations (about 2 x 10(-5) g/ml) of dimorpholamine potentiate the twitch 
contraction of frog sartorius muscle.
In relatively high concentrations of 
10(-4)--10(-3) g/ml, however, the potentiation was followed by depression.
Endplate potential was not affected by the drug.
Dimorpholamine depolarized 
slightly the muscle membrane.
The contracture tension vs. membrane potential 
relationship was hardly affected by the drug in the presence of 2 x 10(-7) M 
tetrodotoxin.
Action potentials recorded from muscle fibers treated with 
ethylene glycol showed marked and progressive increases in duration during 
exposure to the drug, and were finally blocked.
It was concluded that twitch 
potentiation caused by dimorpholamine is due to the prolongation of the action 
potential.
A likely molecular mechanism of this drug is discussed in terms of 
the kinetic model proposed by Adrian et al.
(J. Physiol.
208, 607--644, 1970) 
for the excitable membrane of frog sartorius muscle.
DOI: 10.1254/jjp.29.457
PMID: 43915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Relationship between severity of renal damage and erythropoietin production in uranyl nitrate-induced acute renal failure. 1. Exp Hematol. 1986 May;14(4):257-60.

Relationship between severity of renal damage and erythropoietin production in 
uranyl nitrate-induced acute renal failure.

Giglio MJ
 Bozzini CE, Barcat JA, Arrizurieta E.

Adult female Wistar rats were injected with 1 mg/kg body weight of uranyl 
nitrate (UN).
Evaluation of renal function, histopathology studies, and 
determination of plasma erythropoietin (Ep) titers after exposure to 456 mb for 
16 h were performed at 1, 2, 7, 10, 15, and 21 days after drug injection.
Plasma 
urea and creatinine concentrations markedly increased during the first seven 
days after injection, reaching maximal values on day 7 and decreasing 
thereafter.
Significant increases in urine volume and significant depressions in 
urine osmolality also were observed; both alterations were most marked on day 7 
after injection.
A coagulative necrosis of the epithelium of proximal convoluted 
tubules, desquamation of the necrotic cells, and dilation or collapse of the 
tubular lumen were observed; the lesions were more marked on day 7.
Plasma Ep 
levels in UN-treated rats exposed to hypobaria were markedly lower than in 
noninjected controls similarly exposed.
Measurements were performed one, two, 
and seven days after UN injection, with maximal depression observed on day 7.
These observations indicate that there is a correlation between the extent of 
both tubule damage and degree of renal dysfunction and plasma Ep production 
during exposure to hypoxia in UN-treated rats.
This suggests that the renal Ep 
component is derived primarily from tubular cells.
PMID: 3699109 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Behavioral Effects of Levonantradol and Nantradol in the Rhesus Monkey <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> In rhesus monkeys
 acute administration of levonantradol and nantradol produced signs of CNS depression, including ataxia with body sag, pupil dilation, ptosis, dozing, and reduced responsivity to external stimuli.
Neither compound suppressed the morphine withdrawal syndrome; however, both alleviated the chronic abdominal contraction associated with withdrawal.
The directly observable effects of these compounds were not antagonized by naloxone.
When levonantradol was administered every 6 hours, marked tolerance developed to both the effects of levonantradol and nabilone and THC.
No signs of withdrawal were observed when levonantradol injections were abruptly discontinued.
When substituted in lieu of codeine under an intravenous drug self‐administration procedure, neither levonantradol nor nantradol maintained responding at rates higher than those maintained by their vehicle.
Finally, the discriminative effects of levonantradol were not equivalent to those of the narcotics ethylketazocine or etorphine.</jats:p>
[Effect of stimulation and depression of macrophages on development of paracetamol-induced acute toxic hepatitis in rats]. 1. Eksp Klin Farmakol. 2003 Jan-Feb;66(1):57-9.

[Effect of stimulation and depression of macrophages on development of 
paracetamol-induced acute toxic hepatitis in rats].

[Article in Russian]

Levina OA(1)
 Goncharova IA, Filatova TG, Nadeev AN, Korolenko TA, Sukhenko TG, 
Kolesnikova OP.
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Cell Biochemistry, Institute of Physiology, Siberian Division, 
Russian Academy of Medical Sciences, Timakova Str., 4, Novosibirsk, 630117 
Russia.
The role of macrophage (Kupffer cell) stimulation and suppression in the 
development of a toxic liver damage was studied in rats with acute hepatitis 
induced by paracetamol (acetaminophen, 1000 mg/kg).
Pretreatment with 
carboxymethylated (1-->3)-beta-D-glucan (25 mg/kg, i.p., 48 h before 
paracetamol) for the macrophage stimulation or with gadolinium chloride (GdCl3, 
7.5 mg/kg, i.v., 24 h before paracetamol) for the macrophage suppression has a 
protective effect manifested by normalization of the liver function test 
parameters and by a decrease in the degree of morphological changes in the liver 
cells.
A relation between these positive effects and the TNF-alpha secretion by 
macrophages is discussed.
PMID: 12683084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Effects of Δ<sup>9</sup>-Tetrahydrocannabinol on Action Potentials in the Mollusc <i>Aplysia</i> <jats:p> The effects of Δ<jats:sup>9</jats:sup>-tetrahydrocannabinol (Δ<jats:sup>9</jats:sup>-THC) on action potentials were examined during intrasomatic recordings from the isolated buccal and parieto–visceral ganglia of Aplysia californica. When added to the saline solution bathing the preparation
 the compound (in concentrations 10<jats:sup>−4</jats:sup>–10<jats:sup>−5</jats:sup> M) caused a reduction in spike overshoot (15–20% of total amplitude) and increased the lability of responses to electrical stimulation.
The somatic membrane appeared to be more affected than the axonal membrane.
Diffusion barriers in the ganglion probably account for the high degree of variability in drug response, such that both of the characteristic changes were observed in only about 30% of the tests.
This is the first report to describe effects of Δ<jats:sup>9</jats:sup>-THC on invertebrate neurones.
The results indicate that Δ<jats:sup>9</jats:sup>-THC causes a depression in nerve cell excitability, and these data are consistent with reported effects of THC compounds in mammals.
</jats:p>
Role of glutathione in the metabolism-dependent toxicity and chemotherapy of cyclophosphamide. 1. Cancer Res. 1981 Sep;41(9 Pt 1):3584-91.

Role of glutathione in the metabolism-dependent toxicity and chemotherapy of 
cyclophosphamide.

Gurtoo HL
 Hipkens JH, Sharma SD.
The role of glutathione in the biological effects of cyclophosphamide (CP) was 
evaluated by investigating the following: effect of CP on hepatic glutathione 
levels; relationship between hepatic glutathione depletion (repletion) and the 
binding of [chloroethyl-3H]CP and [4-14C]CP to hepatic macromolecules; effects 
of interaction between CP (or acrolein) and diethyl maleate (a classical 
glutathione depletor), and/or between CP and cysteine on the binding of labeled 
CP to hepatic macromolecules, on the induction of hematuria, on the content of 
hepatic cytochrome P-450, on weight gain in rats, on survival in mice, and on 
the chemotherapeutic efficacy of CP against Walker 256 carcinoma in rats.
CP and 
acrolein produced dose-dependent depletion of hepatic glutathione in mice, 
whereas phosphoramide mustard was at least one order of magnitude less 
effective.
Acrolein caused death in mice; CP became covalently bound to hepatic 
macromolecules, prevented weight gain in rats, and produced hematuria and 
depression of hepatic cytochrome P-450 in vivo.
These effects of CP (or 
acrolein) were enhanced by diethyl maleate but partially blocked by cysteine.
On 
the other hand, reduction in the volume of Walker 256 carcinoma in rats by CP 
was not antagonized by cysteine.
All these investigations point to the following 
conclusions: (a) acrolein produced during the metabolism of CP binds to proteins 
and, by doing so may denature these proteins; and (b) acrolein in vivo 
preferentially reacts with glutathione, and sulfhydryl-containing compounds may 
protect against acrolein toxicity and at the same time not interfere with the 
chemotherapeutic activity of CP.
PMID: 7260917 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long-term potentiation and long-term depression of primary afferent neurotransmission in the rat spinal cord <jats:p>Synaptic transmission between dorsal root afferents and neurons in the superficial laminae of the spinal dorsal horn (laminae I-III) was examined by intracellular recording in a transverse slice preparation of rat spinal cord. Brief high-frequency electrical stimulation (300 pulses at 100 Hz) of primary afferent fibers produced a long-term potentiation (LTP) or a long-term depression (LTD) of fast (monosynaptic and polysynaptic) EPSPs in a high proportion of dorsal horn neurons. Both the AMPA and the NMDA receptor-mediated components of synaptic transmission at the primary afferent synapses with neurons in the dorsal horn can exhibit LTP and LTD of the synaptic responses. In normal and neonatally capsaicin-treated rats
 the induction of LTP requires the activation of NMDA receptor-gated conductances.
The induction of LTP or LTD, however, was not abolished in the presence of bicuculline, a GABAA receptor antagonist.
The results demonstrate that distinct and long-lasting modulation in synaptic efficiency can be induced at primary afferent synapses with neurons in the superficial laminae of spinal dorsal horn by high-frequency stimulation of dorsal root afferents and that these changes may be physiologically relevant for transmission and integration of sensory information, including pain.</jats:p>
Effects of cortisone and actinomycin-D upon pyrimidine nucleotide and RNA metabolism in rat liver 1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1969 Jan;129(1):152-7. doi:
10.1016/0003-9861(69)90161-1.

Effects of cortisone and actinomycin-D upon pyrimidine nucleotide and RNA 
metabolism in rat liver.

Yu FL
 Feigelson P.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(69)90161-1
PMID: 5762960 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of cholecystokinin on respiration and sleep 1. Brain Res. 1986 Jul 16;378(1):127-32. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(86)90293-3.

Effect of chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of cholecystokinin on 
respiration and sleep.

DeMesquita S
 Haney WH.
We investigated the effect of chronic intracerebroventricular infusion of the 
sulfated cholecystokinin octapeptide (CCK-8S) on sleep pattern and respiratory 
rate.
The results indicate a depression of respiratory rate during Non-REM and 
REM sleep as well as an increase in the number of REM periods occurring per hour 
of Non-REM sleep.
It is suggested that central release of CCK-8S is capable of 
modulating the automatic regulation of respiration during sleep and altering the 
normal sleep-waking pattern.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(86)90293-3
PMID: 3742195 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant Effects of a Plant-Derived Flavonoid Baicalein Involving Extracellular Signal-Regulated Kinases Cascade 1. Biol Pharm Bull. 2011;34(2):253-9. doi: 10.1248/bpb.34.253.

Antidepressant effects of a plant-derived flavonoid baicalein involving 
extracellular signal-regulated kinases cascade.

Xiong Z(1)
 Jiang B, Wu PF, Tian J, Shi LL, Gu J, Hu ZL, Fu H, Wang F, Chen JG.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tongji Medical College, Huazhong University of 
Science and Technology, Wuhan 430030, China.
Depression and related mood disorders are among the world's greatest public 
health problems.
Previous studies have demonstrated that baicalein (Bai), one 
plant-derived active flavonoid, exhibits neuroprotection against ischemic brain 
injury and stimulates the levels of phosphorylation of extracellular 
signal-regulated kinase (pERK) and brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 
expression in vivo.
In this study, the antidepressant-like effects of baicalein 
was investigated using acute and chronic animal models of depression.
The 
results showed that acute application of Bai at doses of 1, 2 and 4 mg/kg by 
intraperitoneal injection (i.p.)
significantly reduced the immobility time in 
the forced swimming test (FST) and tail suspending test (TST) of mice.
In 
addition, the chronic application of Bai by i.p.
for 21 d also reduced the 
immobility time and improved locomotor activity in chronic unpredictable mild 
stress (CMS) model rats.
Furthermore, it was shown that Bai reversed the 
reduction of extracellular ERKs phosphorylation and the level of BDNF expression 
in the hippocampus of CMS model rats.
These results suggest that Bai produce an 
antidepressant-like effect and this effect is at least partly mediated by 
hippocampal ERK-mediated neurotrophic action.
DOI: 10.1248/bpb.34.253
PMID: 21415537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Possible involvement of nitric oxide (NO) signaling pathway in the antidepressant-like effect of MK-801(dizocilpine)
 a NMDA receptor antagonist in mouse forced swim test.
1.
Indian J Exp Biol.
2008 Mar;46(3):164-70.
Possible involvement of nitric oxide (NO) signaling pathway in the 
antidepressant-like effect of MK-801(dizocilpine), a NMDA receptor antagonist in 
mouse forced swim test.
Dhir A(1), Kulkarni SK.
Author information:
(1)Pharmacology Division, University Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Panjab University, Chandigarh 160014, India.
L-arginine-nitric oxide (NO)-cyclic guanosine monophosphate (cGMP) is an 
important signaling pathway involved in depression.
With this information, the 
present study aimed to study the involvement of this signaling pathway in the 
antidepressant-like action of MK-801 (dizocilpine; N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor 
antagonist) in the mouse forced-swim test.
Total immobility period was recorded 
in mouse forced swim test for 6 min.
MK-801 (5-25 microg/kg., ip) produced a 
U-shaped curve in reducing the immobility period.
The antidepressant-like effect 
of MK-801 (10 microg/kg, ip) was prevented by pretreatment with L-arginine (750 
mg/kg, ip) [substrate for nitric oxide synthase (NOS)].
Pretreatment of mice 
with 7-nitroindazole (7-NI) (25 mg/kg, ip) [a specific neuronal nitric oxide 
synthase inhibitor] produced potentiation of the action of subeffective dose of 
MK-801 (5 microg/kg, ip).
In addition, treatment of mice with methylene blue (10 
mg/kg, ip) [direct inhibitor of both nitric oxide synthase and soluble guanylate 
cyclase] potentiated the effect of MK-801 (5 microg/kg, ip) in the forced-swim 
test.
Further, the reduction in the immobility period elicited by MK-801 (10 
microg/kg, ip) was also inhibited by pretreatment with sildenafil (5 mg/kg, ip) 
[phosphodiesterase 5 inhibitor].
The various modulators used in the study and 
their combination did not produce any changes in locomotor activity per se and 
in combination with MK-801.
MK-801 however, at higher doses (25 microg/kg, ip) 
produced hyperlocomotion.
The results demonstrated the involvement of nitric 
oxide signaling pathway in the antidepressant-like effect of MK-801 in mouse 
forced-swim test.
PMID: 18432055 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Parathyroid hormone and renal cell metabolism 1. Biochemistry. 1968 Oct;7(10):3728-33. doi: 10.1021/bi00850a053.

Parathyroid hormone and renal cell metabolism.

Nagata N
 Rasmussen H.

DOI: 10.1021/bi00850a053
PMID: 4300707 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Motor activation in short- and long-term reserpinized mice: role of 
 dopamine D1 and dopamine D2 receptors 1.
Eur J Pharmacol.
1994 Apr 1;255(1-3):203-13. doi:
10.1016/0014-2999(94)90099-x.
Motor activation in short- and long-term reserpinized mice: role of 
N-methyl-D-aspartate, dopamine D1 and dopamine D2 receptors.
Ferré S(1), Giménez-Llort L, Artigas F, Martínez E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurochemistry, C.S.I.C., Barcelona, Spain.
The effects of dopamine D1 and dopamine D2 receptor agonists and of 
subconvulsant doses of N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) and the non-competitive NMDA 
receptor antagonist, dizocilpine (MK-801), alone and in combination, on the 
motor activity of short- and long-term reserpinized mice (mice pretreated with 5 
mg/kg reserpine 4 h or 20 h before, respectively) were analyzed.
With short-term 
reserpinization, the dopamine D2 receptor agonist, quinpirole (1.5 mg/kg), but 
not the dopamine D1 receptor agonist, SKF-38393 (15 mg/kg), increased motor 
activity.
The effect of quinpirole in short-term reserpinized mice was 
potentiated by the simultaneous administration of SKF-38393 (15 mg/kg) and was 
counteracted by the previous administration of the dopamine D2 receptor 
antagonist, raclopride (1 mg/kg), or by the simultaneous administration of NMDA 
(25 mg/kg) or MK-801 (0.5 mg/kg).
Neither NMDA (25-100 mg/kg) nor MK-801 (0.5-3 
mg/kg) induced motor activation in short-term reserpinized mice.
With long-term 
reserpinization, either quinpirole (1.5 mg/kg) or SKF-38393 (15 mg/kg) increased 
motor activity.
The effect of quinpirole in long-term reserpinized mice was not 
potentiated by the concurrent administration of SKF-38393 (15 mg/kg), was 
inhibited by the simultaneous administration of MK-801 (0.5 mg/kg) and was not 
modified by NMDA (25 mg/kg).
The effect of SKF-38393 (15 mg/kg) in long-term 
reserpinized mice was inhibited by the concomitant administration of MK-801 (0.5 
mg/kg) and was slightly antagonized by NMDA (25 mg/kg).
NMDA induced motor 
activation in long-term reserpinized mice at doses which were similar to those 
causing motor activation in non-reserpinized mice (75 and 100 mg/kg), while 
MK-801 induced motor activation at a dose which was associated with motor 
depression in non-reserpinized mice (2 mg/kg).
The NMDA-induced motor activation 
in long-term reserpinized mice was counteracted by the previous administration 
of a low dose of MK-801 (0.5 mg/kg) and was still present when a stronger 
dopamine-depleting pretreatment was used.
These results are interpreted on the 
basis of changes in sensitivity of the direct striatal efferent pathway after 
long-term reserpinization.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(94)90099-x
PMID: 7913043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Phenylbutazone toxicity in ponies. 1. Vet Rec. 1979 Jul 14;105(2):26-30. doi: 10.1136/vr.105.2.26.

Phenylbutazone toxicity in ponies.

Snow DH
 Bogan JA, Douglas TA, Thompson H.

The oral administration of phenylbutazone at a dose rate of approximately 10 mg 
per kg per day for seven to 14 days resulted in the development of signs of 
toxicity in seven of eight ponies treated.
Clinical signs included anorexia, 
depression and abdominal oedema.
Blood biochemical determinations showed a 
decrease in total plasma protein and calcium concentrations with an increase in 
urea concentration.
These changes were considered indicative of water retention.
Three of the ponies died during treatment following the development of shock.
Shock was considered to arise from the submucosal oedema of the large intestine 
observed on necropsy.
Oral ulceration was also found in these animals.
In two 
ponies intravenous administration of phenylbutazone (4.0 mg per kg) for seven 
days was studied.
In one of these ponies a marked decrease in total plasma 
protein concentration occurred.
DOI: 10.1136/vr.105.2.26
PMID: 555115 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Activation of nicotinic acetylcholine receptors induces long‐term potentiation in vivo in the intact mouse dentate gyrus <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The present study was conducted to clarify the role of nicotinic ACh receptors (nAChRs) on long‐term potentiation (LTP) in vivo in the intact mouse dentate gyrus using extracellular recording techniques. Intraperitoneal application of nicotine at a dose of 3.0 mg/kg but not 0.03 or 0.3 mg/kg produced a gradually developing
 long‐lasting increase for 120 min similar to tetanic LTP.
Nicotine at a dose of 9.0 mg/kg caused a temporary increase followed by depression.
The long‐lasting potentiation induced by nicotine at 3.0 mg/kg, which was named nicotinic long‐term potentiation (LTPn), and tetanic LTP were significantly suppressed by pretreatment with mecamylamine (0.5 mg/kg i.p.
), a nonselective nicotinic antagonist, but not affected by postapplication of mecamylamine.
Interestingly, choline, a selective α7 nAChR agonist, at 3.0–90 mg/kg, induced the long‐lasting potentiation similar to LTPn in a dose‐dependent manner in vivo in the intact mouse dentate gyrus.
The long‐lasting potentiation induced by choline (30 mg/kg i.p.)
was additionally increased by postapplication of nicotine (3.0 mg/kg i.p.)
or tetanic stimulation.
The present study revealed that systemic application of nicotine or choline induced the long‐lasting potentiation in vivo in the intact mouse dentate gyrus, suggesting that α7 nAChRs may contribute to the induction of LTP by nicotine, and supporting in vivo animal studies that nicotine improves learning and memory performance.</jats:p>
Single and multiple vesicle fusion induce different rates of endocytosis at a central synapse 1. Nature. 2002 May 30;417(6888):555-9. doi: 10.1038/417555a.

Single and multiple vesicle fusion induce different rates of endocytosis at a 
central synapse.

Sun JY(1)
 Wu XS, Wu LG.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Washington University School of Medicine, St. 
Louis, MO 63110, USA.
During synaptic transmission, neurotransmitter-laden vesicles fuse with the 
presynaptic membrane and discharge their contents into the synaptic cleft.
After 
fusion, the vesicular membrane is retrieved by endocytosis for reuse.
This 
recycling mechanism ensures a constant supply of releasable vesicles at the 
nerve terminal.
The kinetics of endocytosis have been measured mostly after 
intense or non-physiological stimulation.
Here we use capacitance measurements 
to resolve the fusion and retrieval of single and multiple vesicles following 
mild physiological stimulation at a mammalian central synapse.
The time constant 
of endocytosis after single vesicle fusion was 56 ms; after a single action 
potential or trains at < or = 2 Hz it was about 115 ms, but increased gradually 
to tens of seconds as the frequency and the number of action potentials 
increased.
These results indicate that an increase in the rate of exocytosis at 
the active zone induces a decrease in the rate of endocytosis.
Existing models, 
including inhibition of endocytosis by Ca(2+), could not account for these 
results our results suggest that an accumulation of unretrieved vesicles at the 
plasma membrane slows endocytosis.
These findings may resolve the debate about 
the dependence of endocytosis kinetics on the stimulation frequency, and suggest 
a potential role of regulation of endocytosis in short-term synaptic depression.
DOI: 10.1038/417555a
PMID: 12037569 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Cure of a case of melancholia after a provoked attack of voltaic vertigo]. 1. Ann Med Psychol (Paris). 1950 Mar;108(1 3):325-30.

[Cure of a case of melancholia after a provoked attack of voltaic vertigo].

[Article in Undetermined Language]

BABINSKI J.

PMID: 15425999 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Synthesis of some N-substituted 3
4-pyrroledicarboximides as potential CNS depressive agents.
1.
Pharmazie.
2000 Jan;55(1):9-16.
Synthesis of some N-substituted 3,4-pyrroledicarboximides as potential CNS 
depressive agents.
Malinka W(1), Sieklucka-Dziuba M, Rajtar G, Rejdak R, Rejdak K, Kleinrok Z.
Author information:
(1)Department of Chemistry of Drugs, Wrocław Medical University, Poland.
As a continuation of our work on 
N-[4-aryl(heteroaryl)piperazin-1-ylalkyl]-3,4-pyrro ledicarboximides, which were 
characterized by strong analgesic activity and CNS depressive action, several 
novel N-substituted 3,4-pyrroledicarboximides were prepared and eleven 
representatives were examined in a series of in vivo CNS tests.
A few of these 
compounds displayed a similar profile of biological selectivity to that of 
3,4-pyrroledicarboximides described previously; their structure-activity 
relationships are discussed.
PMID: 10683864 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antithyroid Activity of Goitrin in Chicks 1. Poult Sci. 1976 Mar;55(2):716-9. doi: 10.3382/ps.0550716.

Antithyroid activity of goitrin in chicks.

Akiba Y
 Matsumoto J.

Antithyroid activity of orally administered goitrin was assessed by 
parallel-line assay in chicks using four indices.
The relative potency of 
goitrin in chicks was estimated to be approximately 0.31 times the potency of 
PTU in causing enlargement of thyroid gland, 0.06 times in effect on depression 
in plasma thyroid hormone, and 0.08 times in inhibitory effects on biosynthesis 
of thyroid hormone in the gland.
It might be concluded that thyroid hormone 
synthesis is not so much suppressed to the degree expected from the enlargement 
of thyroid gland when goitrin is administered orally to the chick.
DOI: 10.3382/ps.0550716
PMID: 59353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Lidocaine Effects on Brain Mitochondrial Metabolism in Vitro 1. Anesthesiology. 1975 Jun;42(6):737-40. doi: 10.1097/00000542-197506000-00018.

Lidocaine effects on brain mitochondrial metabolism in vitro.

Haschke RH
 Fink BR.
Both lidocaine and anoxia inhibit rapid axonal transport.
In an attempt to 
elucidate the mechanism of this action of lidocaine, its effect on mitochondrial 
respiration was studies.
The local anesthetic produces a dose-dependent 
inhibition of oxygen consumption (50 per cent inhibition at 8mM) by porcine 
brain mitochondria when glutamate, but not when succinate, serves as the 
substrate.
This indicates electron transport is blocked at the NADH 
dehydrogenase level.
Potent uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation is observed 
with both substrates.
All of the effects are readily reversible upon removal of 
the anesthetic.
It is concluded that lidocaine apparently inhibits rapid axonal 
transport by depressing oxidative metabolism.
DOI: 10.1097/00000542-197506000-00018
PMID: 1130742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ultrastructural study of the hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal system in rats after colchicine treatment. 1. Neuropatol Pol. 1982;20(3-4):317-28.

Ultrastructural study of the hypothalamo-neurohypophyseal system in rats after 
colchicine treatment.

Gajkowska B
 Borowicz JW.
PMID: 6191249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of ?8-THC on alcohol-induced sleeping time in the rat 1. Psychopharmacologia. 1974;39(3):193-8. doi: 10.1007/BF00421026.

Effect of delta8-THC on alcohol-induced sleeping time in the rat.

Friedman E
 Gershon S.

DOI: 10.1007/BF00421026
PMID: 4427987 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Studies on production of biologically active substances which inhibit cell migration in supernatants and extracts of hypersensitive lymphoid cells incubated with specific antigen in vitro. 1. Immunology. 1968 Jul;15(1):1-11.

Studies on production of biologically active substances which inhibit cell 
migration in supernatants and extracts of hypersensitive lymphoid cells 
incubated with specific antigen in vitro.

Svejcar J
 Pekárek J, Johanovský J.
When lymphoid cells from hypersensitive rabbits are incubated with antigen, 
biologically active substances are formed and released which are capable of 
inhibiting the migration of normal non-sensitized mesenchymal cells.
In the 
present paper some basic parameters of their production were determined.
These 
substances were regularly obtained after 6 and 18 hours incubation, but not 
after 2 hours.
Under more favourable cultivation conditions (lower density of 
lymphocyte suspension) an increased activity in the cell extracts as compared 
with the supernatants was observed.
Another critical factor in the production of 
these substances is the quantity of antigen added.
Ten micrograms of PPD leads 
to the production and liberation of a highly effective substance.
A lower dose 
of antigen results in the liberation of a substance into the supernatant which 
by itself is almost inactive, but becomes more active when more antigen is 
added.
The efficiency of the released substances was determined by serial 
dilution.
The inhibiting activity was maintained at 1:5 and 1:20 and sometimes 
at 1:100 dilutions.
PMCID: PMC1409421
PMID: 5664398 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Calcium reverses global and regional myocardial dysfunction caused by the combination of verapamil and halothane <jats:p>In order to evaluate the effects of the combination of halothane and verapamil on left ventricular function and coronary blood flow (CBF)
 six sheep were anaesthetized with halothane (1.2% inspired) and given increasing cumulative doses of intravenous verapamil.
Regional myocardial function was assessed by sonomicrometry in the areas supplied by the left anterior descending coronary artery (LAD) and the left circumflex coronary artery (LC).
Changes in global haemodynamics, atrioventricular conduction, LV relaxation and systolic shortening alter 0.32 mg·kg<jats:sup>‐1</jats:sup> intravenous verapamil indicated impaired left ventricular function.
Significant myocardial dysfunction (post‐systolic shortening) occurred in the LAD territory, accompanied by a 64% decrease (42 ± 6 to 15 ± 3, <jats:italic>p</jats:italic> &lt; 0.01) in coronary perfusion pressure (CPP).
Coronary blood flow in the LC segment decreased 83% (102 ± 15 to 17 ± 13, P &lt; 0.01) as coronary reserve was exhausted with the decrease in CPP.
Calcium chloride reversed the impairment of global and regional myocardial function observed with verapamil, improved the impaired left ventricular relaxation, but did not significantly alter atrioventricular conduction.
Thus the combination halothane‐verapamil can cause significant left ventricular depression and myocardial dysfunction, possibly by inducing suhendocardial ischaemia or by direct pharmacologic effect.
calcium chloride reverses this regional myocardial dysfunction as well as the deleterious global haemodynamic changes caused by halothane‐verapamil; however, the changes in atrioventricular conduction are not corrected by calcium.</jats:p>
Recurrent networks with short term synaptic depression 1. J Comput Neurosci. 2009 Dec;27(3):607-20. doi: 10.1007/s10827-009-0172-4. Epub
 2009 Jul 4.

Recurrent networks with short term synaptic depression.

York LC(1)
 van Rossum MC.
Author information:
(1)Informatics Forum, Edinburgh, EH8 9AB, UK.
s0570135@sms.ed.ac.uk

Cortical circuitry shows an abundance of recurrent connections.
A widely used 
model that relies on recurrence is the ring attractor network, which has been 
used to describe phenomena as diverse as working memory, visual processing and 
head direction cells.
Commonly, the synapses in these models are static.
Here, 
we examine the behaviour of ring attractor networks when the recurrent 
connections are subject to short term synaptic depression, as observed in many 
brain regions.
We find that in the presence of a uniform background current, the 
network activity can be in either of three states: a stationary attractor state, 
a uniform state, or a rotating attractor state.
The rotation speed can be 
adjusted over a large range by changing the background current, opening the 
possibility to use the network as a variable frequency oscillator or pattern 
generator.
Finally, using simulations we extend the network to two-dimensional 
fields and find a rich range of possible behaviours.
DOI: 10.1007/s10827-009-0172-4
PMID: 19578989 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of the neuronal uptake of 5-hydroxytryptamine and noradrenaline in rat brain by (Z)- and (E)-3-(4-Bromophenyl)-N
N-dimethyl-3-(3-pyridyl) allylamines and their secondary analogues 1.
Neuropharmacology.
1977 Jan;16(1):57-63. doi: 10.1016/0028-3908(77)90048-x.
Inhibition of the neuronal uptake of 5-hydroxytryptamine and noradrenaline in 
rat brain by (Z)- and (E)-3-(4-bromophenyl)-N,N-dimethyl-3-(3-pyridyl) 
allylamines and their secondary analogues.
Ross SB, Renyi AL.
DOI: 10.1016/0028-3908(77)90048-x
PMID: 834363 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
DILTIAZEM INHIBITS HALOTHANE-INDUCED CONTRACTIONS IN MALIGNANT HYPERTHERMIA-SUSCEPTIBLE MUSCLES IN VITRO 1. Br J Anaesth. 1985 Oct;57(10):994-6. doi: 10.1093/bja/57.10.994.

Diltiazem inhibits halothane-induced contractions in malignant 
hyperthermia-susceptible muscles in vitro.

Ilias WK
 Williams CH, Fulfer RT, Dozier SE.
The ability of diltiazem to suppress halothane and halothane-caffeine induced 
contractures in malignant hyperthermia (MH) susceptible pig muscle, was tested 
in vitro.
Muscle specimens were divided into two groups and tested with a 
modified halothane-caffeine contracture test.
One group acted as the control; 
the other group was pretreated with diltiazem 20 mumol litre-1.
The control 
muscles developed contractures attributable to halothane and halothane-caffeine, 
whereas the diltiazem-treated specimens did not.
Increases in muscle twitch 
tension as a result of halothane or halothane-caffeine exposure occurred in 
treated and untreated specimens, but were significantly delayed in the presence 
of diltiazem.
Muscle exhaustion observed after halothane and halothane-caffeine 
exposure in the control specimens did not occur in the diltiazem treated 
muscles.
DOI: 10.1093/bja/57.10.994
PMID: 4041327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Behavioural changes during withdrawal from desmethylimipramine (DMI) 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1981;75(1):60-4. doi: 10.1007/BF00433503.

Behavioural changes during withdrawal from desmethylimipramine (DMI). II. 
Increased resistance to extinction.

Willner P
 Montgomery T, Bird D.

Rats withdrawn from chronic treatment with the tricyclic antidepressant 
desmethylimipramine (DMI) showed increased resistance to extinction in a runway 
and in continuously reinforced lever pressing.
Changes were not seen in animals 
maintained on DMI.
In acquisition, in the runway, there were no significant 
differences between groups; in the Skinner box, animals maintained on DMI 
performed worse than controls, but withdrawn animals recovered to control levels 
of performance.
It is suggested that the effect on extinction may be mediated by 
a decrease in the efficacy of the dorsal noradrenaline bundle, which develops 
during chronic DMI treatment, but is masked by the presence of DMI.
The 
implications of the conclusion for the " revised catecholamine hypothesis of 
depression" are discussed.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00433503
PMID: 6795662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Studies on a new mechanism of resistance of L5178Y murine leukemia cells to cytosine arabinoside 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1968 Jul 23;161(2):481-93. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2787(68)90124-x.

Studies on a new mechanism of resistance of L5178Y murine leukemia cells to 
cytosine arabinoside.

Momparler RL
 Chu MY, Fischer GA.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2787(68)90124-x
PMID: 4174433 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Are serotonin transporter knockout mice ‘depressed’?: hypoactivity but no anhedonia 1. Neuroreport. 2006 Aug 21;17(12):1347-51. doi: 
10.1097/01.wnr.0000230514.08962.76.

Are serotonin transporter knockout mice 'depressed'?: hypoactivity but no 
anhedonia.

Kalueff AV(1)
 Gallagher PS, Murphy DL.
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Clinical Science, National Institute of Mental Health, 
Bethesda, Maryland 20892-1264, USA.
kalueva@mail.nih.gov

Although the serotonin transporter is a key target for antidepressants, its 
exact role in depression etiology remains unclear.
While serotonin transporter 
knockout mice are a potential model to examine this problem, their depression 
profile is unclear in several 'despair' tests, and may be confounded by their 
hypoactivity phenotype (confirmed here by marble-burying and bedding tests).
To 
assess depression in these mice, we evaluated wild-type, heterozygous, and 
serotonin transporter knockout C57BL/6 male mice on a well-validated, 
anhedonia-based depression paradigm, the sucrose preference test.
Overall, all 
three genotypes showed similar sucrose preference, indicating an unaltered 
hedonic state.
These results demonstrate that depression-like behavior (unlike 
hypoactivity) is not a baseline phenotypic feature of serotonin transporter 
knockout mice, suggesting anew that these mice do not represent a genetic model 
of depression.
DOI: 10.1097/01.wnr.0000230514.08962.76
PMID: 16951583 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Further chemical & pharmacological studies of some 4-N-substituted piperazine-I-carboxylic acid ethyl ester. 1. Indian J Exp Biol. 1977 Aug;15(8):639-41.

Further chemical & pharmacological studies of some 4-N-substituted 
piperazine-I-carboxylic acid ethyl ester.

Chaudhuri SB
 Roy NM, Sikdar S, Mukherjee PK, Das PC, Chatterjee A.

PMID: 606669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Spreading depression and reverberatory seizures induce the upregulation of mRNA for glial fibrillary acidic protein 1. Brain Res. 1994 May 9;645(1-2):215-24. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(94)91654-3.

Spreading depression and reverberatory seizures induce the upregulation of mRNA 
for glial fibrillary acidic protein.

Bonthius DJ(1)
 Stringer JL, Lothman EW, Steward O.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, 
Charlottesville 22908.
The present study evaluates the relative roles of seizure activity and spreading 
depression in upregulating glial fibrillary acidic protein (GFAP) mRNA 
expression.
Stimulating electrodes were placed bilaterally in the angular 
bundle, and recording electrodes were placed bilaterally in the dentate gyrus of 
adult rats.
Intense electrographic seizures were induced by delivering stimulus 
trains through one stimulating electrode.
In some cases, spreading depression 
accompanied the seizures, while in other cases, the seizures occurred in the 
absence of spreading depression.
Animals were killed 24 h following the last 
stimulus train, and the forebrains were prepared for quantitative in situ 
hybridization.
Seizure activity and spreading depression led to significant 
increases in GFAP mRNA levels in the hippocampal formation.
Seizure activity 
alone (without spreading depression) induced a 4-fold increase in GFAP mRNA 
levels in the hilus and molecular layer of the dentate gyrus and in stratum 
lacunosum-moleculare of the hippocampus.
When seizure activity was accompanied 
by spreading depression, there was a 10-fold increase in GFAP mRNA levels in 
these same regions.
Regional differences within the hippocampal formation in 
glial cell response were evident.
While GFAP mRNA levels in stratum 
lacunosum-moleculare of the hippocampus were upregulated by seizure activity and 
spreading depression, levels in hippocampal stratum radiatum of the hippocampus 
remained unchanged.
The results suggest that abnormal neuronal activity can 
influence glial cell gene expression and that spreading depression is a stronger 
signal than seizure activity in upregulating GFAP mRNA levels.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(94)91654-3
PMID: 8062084 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
An HDAC-dependent epigenetic mechanism that enhances the efficacy of the antidepressant drug fluoxetine <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Depression is a prevalent and debilitating psychiatric illnesses. However
 currently prescribed antidepressant drugs are only efficacious in a limited group of patients.
Studies on Balb/c mice suggested that histone deacetylase (HDAC) inhibition may enhance the efficacy of the widely-prescribed antidepressant drug fluoxetine.
This study shows that reducing HDAC activity in fluoxetine-treated Balb/c mice leads to robust antidepressant and anxiolytic effects.
While reducing the activity of class I HDACs 1 and 3 led to antidepressant effects, additional class II HDAC inhibition was necessary to exert anxiolytic effects.
In fluoxetine-treated mice, HDAC inhibitors increased enrichment of acetylated histone H4 protein and RNA polymerase II at promotor 3 of the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (Bdnf) gene and increased Bdnf transcription from this promotor.
Reducing Bdnf-stimulated tropomyosin kinase B receptor activation in fluoxetine-treated mice with low HDAC activity abolished the behavioral effects of fluoxetine, suggesting that the HDAC-triggered epigenetic stimulation of Bdnf expression is critical for therapeutic efficacy.</jats:p>
Effect of molybdenum on the developing rat tooth in tissue culture. 1. Proc Finn Dent Soc. 1974 Aug;70(4):141-6.

Effect of molybdenum on the developing rat tooth in tissue culture.

Rahkamo A
 Tuompo H.

PMID: 4413073 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibitory effect of cycloheximide on gastric secretion in rats 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1977 May 15;26(10):979-81. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(77)90478-6.

Inhibitory effect of cycloheximide on gastric secretion in rats.

Korbová L
 Kohout J, Cízková J, Cihák A.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(77)90478-6
PMID: 16607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Prostaglandin Action on Noradrenaline Release and Mechanical Responses in the Stimulated Guinea Pig Vas Deferens <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>PGE<jats:sub>1</jats:sub> and PGE<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> reversibly and dose‐dependently inhibited transmitter release from the stimulated guinea pig vas deferens. The two compounds proved equiactive and more prone to inhibit transmitter release at a low than at a high stimulation frequency. The PGEs inhibited the twitch response but produced inconsistent effects on contractions induced by prolonged stimulation. The difference may be due to the fact that the PGEs reduce the excitatory junction potentials and depolarize the effector cell membrane. Phenoxybenzamine increased transmitter release in response to nerve stimulation but failed to significantly alter the inhibitory effect of PGE<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>. It is therefore concluded that PGEs and presumed presynoptic α‐receptors probably intrude upon different levels of the process of excitation secretor
 coupling.
A possible model for the action of locally formed PGEs on the neuromuscular transmission of the vas deferens is advanced.</jats:p>
Maturation in properties of motoneurons and their segmental input in the neonatal rat <jats:p> 1. The isolated neonatal rat spinal chord preparation was used to investigate the development of segmental afferent input to lumbar motoneourons during the first nine postnatal days. Motoneurons
 identified with the use of antidromic stimulation of the ventral roots, were characterized electrophysiologically, and their synaptic input in response to stimulation of the homologous dorsal root was studied.
2.
Motoneurons in postnatal day (P) 1–3 preparations exhibited lower rheobase and lower input conductance than those impaled in spinal cords taken from animals at P7-9.
This finding is consistent with the increase in motoneuron size known to occur during this time.
3.
Monosynaptic excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) evoked at low-frequency (0.1-Hz) stimulation in high-Ca2+ saline exhibited no change in mean amplitude between P1-3 and P7-9 despite an increase in input conductance of the motoneurons, suggesting that some aspect of these synapses underwent a compensatory change.
Polysynaptic EPSPs were smaller in the older animals.
4.
When bursts of stimuli were delivered at higher frequencies ranging from 10 to 167 Hz, the EPSPs exhibited substantial depression.
The depression of monosynaptic EPSPs was significantly less at P7-9 than at P1-3.
Changing the bathing solution from a high-Ca2+ saline to a low-Ca2+/high-Mg2+ saline reduced the amplitude of the monosynaptic EPSP and made it less susceptible to depression during high-frequency stimulation.
Facilitation of the evoked response, which has been observed in the adult rat, was never seen under any of these conditions.
5.
Although synapses on high-rheobase motoneurons exhibited less depression than those on low-rheobase motoneurons, as anticipated from previous results in adults, the EPSPs at synapses on high-rheobase motoneurons tended to be larger in amplitude, not smaller as expected.
This suggests that the specialization among synapses on motoneurons that exists in adults has not yet developed by P7-9.
Instead, EPSP amplitude may be greater in motoneurons that have been growing rapidly, such as the high-rheobase motoneurons found during these stages of development.
6.
Evidence is presented that the growing diversity shown in modulation behavior at the Ia afferent motoneuron synapse during the first postnatal week is determined primarily by motoneuron characteristics.
It is speculated that as motoneurons grow during the immediate postnatal period, the presynaptic terminal regions of axons terminating on them become specialized to render the synapse less susceptible to depression.
This specialization may be myelination of the afferent terminals or may perhaps be related to the transmitter release process itself.
The adult distribution of depression develops later, presumably as the components of the monosynaptic reflex mature.
</jats:p>
Sodium butyrate
 an epigenetic interventional strategy, attenuates a stress-induced alteration of MK-801's pharmacologic action 1.
Eur Neuropsychopharmacol.
2008 Aug;18(8):565-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2007.11.004.
Epub 2008 Mar 4.
Sodium butyrate, an epigenetic interventional strategy, attenuates a 
stress-induced alteration of MK-801's pharmacologic action.
Deutsch SI(1), Rosse RB, Long KD, Gaskins BL, Burket JA, Mastropaolo J.
Author information:
(1)Mental Health Service Line, Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, 
NW, Washington, DC 20422, United States.
Stephen.Deutsch@med.va.gov

Twenty-four hours after mice are exposed to a single session of forced swimming 
in cold water, the ability of MK-801 (dizocilpine), a noncompetitive NMDA 
receptor antagonist, to antagonize electrically precipitated seizures is 
reduced.
Conceivably, this reduction in MK-801's antiseizure efficacy reflects a 
stress-induced alteration in NMDA receptor-mediated neurotransmission due to 
changes in gene expression 24 h after a single stress.
Recently, epigenetic 
interventional strategies impacting expression of genes whose regulation is 
controlled by the acetylation status of histone proteins in the nucleosome, an 
octomeric complex of histone proteins and promoter regions of double-stranded 
DNA, have been tested in preclinical models of various neuropsychiatric 
disorders, including Huntington disease and major depression.
These strategies 
have been studied extensively in cancer biology.
In the current investigation, 
the severity of the stress-induced reduction of MK-801's ability to raise the 
threshold voltage for the elicitation of tonic hindlimb extension was reduced 
when sodium butyrate (1.5 g/kg, ip) was administered around the time of stress.
Prior research showed that this dose of sodium butyrate reliably increased the 
acetylation status of H3 and H4 histone proteins in the hippocampus and cerebral 
cortex of mice.
Thus, the attenuation of the stress-induced reduction of 
MK-801's antiseizure efficacy may be due to the increased acetylation of histone 
proteins in the nucleosomal core and promotion of gene expression.
These data 
encourage development of epigenetic strategies to prevent some of the 
deleterious consequences of stress.
DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2007.11.004
PMID: 18164185 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Behavioral and Histopathologic Effects Following Intrathecal Administration of Butorphanol
 Sufentanil, and Nalbuphine in Sheep 1.
Anesthesiology.
1991 Dec;75(6):1025-34. doi: 10.1097/00000542-199112000-00015.
Behavioral and histopathologic effects following intrathecal administration of 
butorphanol, sufentanil, and nalbuphine in sheep.
Rawal N(1), Nuutinen L, Raj PP, Lovering SL, Gobuty AH, Hargardine J, Lehmkuhl 
L, Herva R, Abouleish E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Texas Health Science Center, 
Houston.
Comment in
    Anesthesiology.
1992 Sep;77(3):605-7. doi: 10.1097/00000542-199209000-00038.
A large number of opioids and nonopioids have been administered epidurally and 
intrathecally in the hope of providing segmental analgesia without serious 
adverse effects.
However, neurotoxicity data are generally unavailable for many 
of these drugs.
The present study evaluated the behavioral, motor, 
electroencephalographic, and histopathologic changes following intrathecal 
injection of large and small doses of butorphanol, sufentanil, and nalbuphine in 
sheep.
Thirty-two sheep (20-32 kg) were anesthetized and catheters placed 
intrathecally after hemilaminectomy.
The large doses of butorphanol, sufentanil 
and nalbuphine were 0.375 mg/kg (4.4-5.2 ml), 7.5 micrograms/kg (3.6-4.8 ml) and 
0.75 mg/kg (1.5-2.4 ml), and the small doses were 0.075 mg/kg (0.9-1.1 ml), 1.5 
micrograms/kg (0.7-0.9 ml) and 0.15 mg/kg (0.38-0.5 ml), respectively.
The 
opioids were administered intrathecally every 6 h for 3 days and the 
above-mentioned parameters studied.
Five sheep received intrathecal saline (1.1 
or 5.2 ml) and served as controls.
Histopathologic changes were evaluated by a 
neuropathologist blinded to the study protocol.
Irrespective of dose, 
intrathecal injection of butorphanol was associated with severe behavioral 
responses such as agitation, rigidity, vocalization, and restlessness, as well 
as prolonged or irreversible hindlimb paralysis.
Electroencephalography showed 
increased cortical activity or seizure activity.
One sheep died because of 
severe respiratory depression that did not respond to naloxone.
Spinal cord 
histologic changes consisted of suppurative meningitis and myelitis as well as 
neuronal changes such as spongiosis and chromatolysis.
Large doses of 
intrathecal sufentanil were associated with similar though somewhat less severe 
responses.
The behavioral and motor changes following the small dose of 
intrathecal sufentanil were of mild to moderate nature.
Following intrathecal 
nalbuphine, the above-mentioned changes were similar to those seen in control 
animals.
We conclude that butorphanol in doses of 0.075 and 0.375 mg/kg 
intrathecally and sufentanil 7.5 micrograms/kg intrathecally are neurotoxic in 
sheep.
DOI: 10.1097/00000542-199112000-00015
PMID: 1835823 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Metabolism of Rabbit Spermatozoa in Homologous Immune Serum and Oviductal Fluid1 1. Biol Reprod. 1969 Dec;1(4):407-10. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod1.4.407.

Metabolism of rabbit spermatozoa in homologous immune serum and oviductal fluid.

Ackerman DR
 Gonzalez-Enders R.

DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod1.4.407
PMID: 5406668 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pitx3 deficient mice as a genetic animal model of co-morbid depressive disorder and parkinsonism 1. Brain Res. 2014 Mar 13;1552:72-81. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.01.023. Epub 
2014 Jan 27.

Pitx3 deficient mice as a genetic animal model of co-morbid depressive disorder 
and parkinsonism.

Kim KS(1)
 Kang YM(2), Kang Y(2), Park TS(2), Park HY(2), Kim YJ(2), Han BS(3), 
Kim CH(4), Lee CH(2), Ardayfio PA(5), Han PL(6), Jung BH(7), Kim KS(8).
Author information:
(1)Laboratory Animal Resource Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: 
kskim@kribb.re.kr.
(2)Laboratory Animal Resource Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology (KRIBB), Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.
(3)Research Center of Integrative Cellulomics, Korea Research Institute of 
Bioscience and Biotechnology, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.
(4)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, McLean Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.
(5)Eli Lilly and Company, Lilly Research Laboratories, Indianapolis, IN 46285, 
USA.
(6)Department of Chemistry and Nano Science, Department of Brain & Cognitive 
Sciences, Ewha Woman׳s University, Seoul 120-750, Republic of Korea.
(7)BioNanotechnology Research Center, Korea Research Institute of Bioscience and 
Biotechnology and Nanobiotechnology Major School of Engineering, University of 
Science and Technology, Daejeon 305-806, Republic of Korea.
(8)Molecular Neurobiology Laboratory, McLean Hospital and Harvard Medical 
School, Belmont, MA 02478, USA.
Electronic address: kskim@mclean.harvard.edu.
Approximately 40-50% of all patients with Parkinson׳s disease (PD) show symptoms 
and signs of depressive disorders, for which neither pathogenic understanding 
nor rational treatment are available.
Using Pit3x-deficient mice, a model for 
selective nigrostriatal dopaminergic neurodegeneration, we tested 
depression-related behaviors and acute stress responses to better understand how 
a nigrostriatal dopaminergic deficit increases the prevalence of depressive 
disorders in PD patients.
Pitx3-deficient mice showed decreased sucrose 
consumption and preference in the two-bottle free-choice test of anhedonia.
Acute restraint stress increased c-Fos (known as a neuronal activity marker) 
expression levels in various brain regions, including the prefrontal cortex, 
striatum, nucleus accumbens, and paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus 
(PVN), in both Pitx3+/+ and -/- mice.
However, the stress-induced increases in 
c-Fos levels in the cortex, dorsal striatum, and PVN were significantly greater 
in Pitx3-/- than +/+ mice, suggesting that signs of depressive disorders in 
parkinsonism are related to altered stress vulnerability.
Based on these 
results, we propose that Pitx3-/- mice may serve as a useful genetic animal 
model for co-morbid depressive disorder and parkinsonism.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.01.023
PMID: 24480473 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differential effects of antidepressant drugs on [3H]dihydroalprenolol and [3H]imipramine ligand recognition sites in olfactory bulbectomized and sham-lesioned rats 1. Gen Pharmacol. 1986;17(3):293-307. doi: 10.1016/0306-3623(86)90044-3.

Differential effects of antidepressant drugs on [3H]dihydroalprenolol and 
[3H]imipramine ligand recognition sites in olfactory bulbectomized and 
sham-lesioned rats.

Jesberger JA
 Richardson JS.
In the olfactory bulbectomy rat model of major depression, the binding of 
[3H]imipramine is increased by 60% in the midbrain, reduced by 30% in the pons 
and by 20% in the hippocampus, and unchanged in the hypothalamus 6 weeks after 
the bulbectomy.
Binding of [3H]dihydroalprenolol is unchanged in the midbrain 
but is increased by 30% in the pons and 15% in the hippocampus.
The i.p.
administration of the antidepressants amitriptyline, mianserin, tranylcypromine 
(all at a dose of 10 mg/kg) or iprindole (25 mg/kg) for 28 days followed by a 
5-day drug washout period, alters brain part [3H]imipramine and 
[3H]dihydroalprenolol binding in a manner that is a function of the particular 
drug, brain part and lesion effect.
Only in the hippocampus did the lesion 
increase beta-binding that was reduced by all four antidepressant drugs.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-3623(86)90044-3
PMID: 3013716 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Furazolidone on Plasma Enzyme and Protein Levels in Turkey Poults 1. Poult Sci. 1981 Jul;60(7):1537-43. doi: 10.3382/ps.0601537.

Effect of furazolidone on plasma enzyme and protein levels in turkey poults.

Czarnecki CM
 Evanson OA, Powers MD, Grahn DA, Good AL.
Furazolidone (FZ) at a dose of 700 ppm was fed to turkey poults beginning at 2 
weeks of age.
In trial 1, plasma collected by venipuncture was assayed for 
glutamic oxalacetic transaminase (GOT), lactate dehydrogenase (LDH), and total 
protein at 19, 23, 26, and 30 days of age.
Significant (P less than or equal to 
.05) differences were noted only in levels of plasma LDH, which were elevated in 
FZ-fed poults at all stages studied.
In Trial 2, plasma collected by 
venipuncture was assayed for creatine phosphokinase (CPK), GOT, glutamic pyruvic 
transaminase (GPT), and LDH daily from 15 through 19 days of age and for protein 
at 19 days of age.
Significant elevations (P less than or equal to .05) were 
noted in levels of plasma a) CPK at 15 days, b) GOT at 18 days, and c) LDH at 17 
and 19 days.
A significant (P less than or equal to .01) depression in plasma 
protein was observed at 19 days.
Plasma GPT was either absent or present in very 
low concentrations.
These data suggest that FZ exerts its primary effect on the 
myocardium.
THe initial myocardial changes occur prior to their detection by 
known electrocardiographic (ECG) technics.
DOI: 10.3382/ps.0601537
PMID: 7322976 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant Administration Modulates Neural Stem Cell Survival and Serotoninergic Differentiation Through Bcl-2 1. Curr Neurovasc Res. 2007 Feb;4(1):19-29. doi: 10.2174/156720207779940707.

Antidepressant administration modulates neural stem cell survival and 
serotoninergic differentiation through bcl-2.

Chen SJ(1)
 Kao CL, Chang YL, Yen CJ, Shui JW, Chien CS, Chen IL, Tsai TH, Ku 
HH, Chiou SH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Opthalmology, Taipei Veterans General Hospital and National 
Yang-Ming University, Taiwan.
The hippocampus has long been associated with learning, memory, and modulation 
of emotional responses.
Previous studies demonstrated that stress-induced loss 
of hippocampal neurons may contribute to the pathogenesis of depression.
The 
recent observations supported that antidepressant drugs increase the production 
of serotoninergic neurotransmitter and they play a critical role in the 
initiation of neurogenesis in the hippocampus.
In order to explore the possible 
new mechanism of the treatment of depression, we cultured neural stem cells 
(NSCs) derived from the hippocampus of adult rats as an in vitro model to 
evaluate the capabilities of neuroprotection and neural differentiation in NSCs 
by fluoxetine (FL) treatment.
Our results showed that 20 microM FL treatment can 
significantly increase the proliferation rate of NSCs (p<0.05), and up-regulate 
the mRNA and protein expressions of Bcl-2 in Day-7 FL-treated NSCs (p<0.01).
Using Bcl-2 gene silencing with small interfering RNA, our data verified that FL 
can prevent Fas ligand-induced caspase-dependent apoptosis in NSCs through the 
activation of Bcl-2.
The in vitro observation and immunofluorescent study 
further demonstrated that FL treatment can stimulate the neurite development and 
serotoninergic differentiation of NSCs through the activation of Bcl-2.
Using 
microdialysis with high performance liquid chromatography- electrochemical 
detection, the functional release of serotonin in the differentiating NSCs with 
FL treatment was increased and simultaneously regulated by the Bcl-2 
expressions.
In sum, the study results indicate that antidepressant 
administration can increase NSCs survival, promote the neurite development, and 
facilitate NSCs differentiating into the functional serotoninergic neurons via 
the modulation of Bcl-2 expression.
DOI: 10.2174/156720207779940707
PMID: 17311541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Platelet aggregation and adhesiveness as well as blood lipids level in dogs treated with di-(1-isoquinolinyl)-di-(pyridyl-2')-butane and carbocromen. 1. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm. 1978 Jan-Feb;30(1):77-81.

Platelet aggregation and adhesiveness as well as blood lipids level in dogs 
treated with di-(1-isoquinolinyl)-di-(pyridyl-2')-butane and carbocromen.

Woyke M
 Cwajda H, Wójcicki J.
The effect of di-(1-isoquinolinyl)-di-(pyridyl-2')-butane (S-147) on platelet 
aggregation and adhesiveness as well as on blood lipids level (total lipids, 
triglycerides, total cholesterol) was tested in mongrel dogs, in comparison with 
carbocromen.
The compounds administered iv (2 mg/kg/day) over 7 days inhibited 
ADP-induced aggregation, being without depressive influence on platelet 
adhesiveness.
S-147 exhibited slightly stronger effect than carbocromen.
The 
inhibition of platelet aggregation was accompanied by the decrease of serum 
lipids level.
PMID: 643741 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Potassium-induced changes in excitability in the hippocampal CA1 region of immature and adult rats 1. Brain Res Dev Brain Res. 1993 Nov 19;76(1):67-73. doi: 
10.1016/0165-3806(93)90123-r.

Potassium-induced changes in excitability in the hippocampal CA1 region of 
immature and adult rats.

Kreisman NR(1)
 Smith ML.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Tulane University School of Medicine, New Orleans, 
LA 70112-2699.
Orthodromic and spontaneous population spike activity was measured in vitro in 
the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices to determine maturational differences 
in excitability and susceptibility to K(+)-induced seizures.
Several indices of 
excitability in the CA1 region changed in a non-monotonic fashion during 
maturation, in response to step-wise increases in bath [K+].
Slices from rats 
18-22 days old, showed a greater probability of both spontaneous epileptiform 
activity and episodes of seizure-like activity followed by spreading depression, 
and more prolonged durations of evoked seizure-like events.
Elevation of [K+] in 
the bathing medium increased these indices in a similar manner in older rats but 
not to the same degree as in 18- to 22-day-old rats.
However, the threshold 
level of bath [K+] resulting in evoked bursts of population spikes was lower in 
adult and 28- to 32-day-old rats than in 18- to 22-day-old rats, suggesting that 
excitability is not uniformly greater at any given age.
In 10- to 15-day-old 
rats, elevation of bath [K+] either produced persistent blockade of population 
responses, or increased the amplitude of the initial population spike, without 
producing bursts.
Basal levels of [K+] in the interstitium of the slices 
corresponded to the various levels of [K+] placed in the bathing medium and 
there were no differences among age groups.
Therefore, differences in basal 
[K+]o cannot account for the maturational changes in excitability and seizure 
activity.
The period from 18-22 days of age in the rat is a useful focal point 
for investigating mechanisms underlying maturational changes in propensity to 
develop seizures.
DOI: 10.1016/0165-3806(93)90123-r
PMID: 8306432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sex-Related Effects of an Immune Challenge on Growth and Begging Behavior of Barn Swallow Nestlings 1. PLoS One. 2011;6(7):e22805. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022805. Epub 2011 Jul
27.

Sex-related effects of an immune challenge on growth and begging behavior of 
barn swallow nestlings.

Romano A(1)
 Rubolini D, Caprioli M, Boncoraglio G, Ambrosini R, Saino N.

Author information:
(1)Dipartimento di Biologia, Università degli Studi di Milano, Milano, Italy.
andrea.romano@unimi.it

Parent-offspring conflicts lead the offspring to evolve reliable signals of 
individual quality, including parasite burden, which may allow parents to 
adaptively modulate investment in the progeny.
Sex-related variation in 
offspring reproductive value, however, may entail differential investment in 
sons and daughters.
Here, we experimentally manipulated offspring condition in 
the barn swallow (Hirundo rustica) by subjecting nestlings to an immune 
challenge (injection with bacterial lipopolysaccharide, LPS) that simulates a 
bacterial infection, and assessed the effects on growth, feather quality, 
expression of morphological (gape coloration) and behavioral (posture) begging 
displays involved in parent-offspring communication, as well as on food 
allocation by parents.
Compared to sham-injected controls, LPS-treated chicks 
suffered a depression of body mass and a reduction of palate color saturation.
In addition, LPS treatment resulted in lower feather quality, with an increase 
in the occurrence of fault bars on wing feathers.
The color of beak flanges, 
feather growth and the intensity of postural begging were affected by LPS 
treatment only in females, suggesting that chicks of either sex are differently 
susceptible to the immune challenge.
However, irrespective of the effects of 
LPS, parents equally allocated food among control and challenged offspring both 
under normal food provisioning and after a short period of food deprivation of 
the chicks.
These results indicate that bacterial infection and the associated 
immune response entail different costs to offspring of either sex, but a 
decrease in nestling conditions does not affect parental care allocation, 
possibly because the barn swallow adopts a brood-survival strategy.
Finally, we 
showed that physiological stress induced by pathogens impairs plumage quality, a 
previously neglected major negative impact of bacterial infection which could 
severely affect fitness, particularly among long-distance migratory birds.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0022805
PMCID: PMC3144944
PMID: 21818393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Cardiovascular Effects of and Interaction Between Calcium Blocking Drugs and Anesthetics in Chronically Instrumented Dogs. V. Role of Pharmacokinetics and the Autonomic Nervous System in the Interactions Between Verapamil and Inhalational Anesthetics <jats:p>To assess the role of both pharmacokinetics and the autonomic nervous system in the interaction between inhalational anesthetics and verapamil
 dogs were chronically instrumented to measure heart rate, PR interval, dP/dt, cardiac output, and aortic blood pressure.
In a first group of seven dogs, studied awake and during halothane (1.2%), enflurane (2.5%), and isoflurane anesthesia (1.6%), verapamil was infused for 30 min in doses calculated to obtain similar plasma concentrations (83 ± 10, 82 ± 6, 81 ± 10, and 77 ± 9 ng • ml<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>, respectively).
For the latter purpose, the infusion dose was 3 and 2 µg • kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> •min<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> awake and during anesthesia, respectively, preceded by a loading dose of 200, 150, and 100 µg • kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>, awake, during isoflurane, and halothane and enflurane, respectively.
In awake dogs, verapamil induced an increase in heart rate (24 ± 5 bpm) and PR interval (35 ± 9 msec) and a decrease in mean arterial pressure (−5 ± 2 mmHg) and dP/dt (−494 ± 116 mmHg/s).
Although plasma concentrations were similar in awake and in anesthetized dogs, the only statistically significant changes induced by verapamil were an increase in heart rate and a decrease in dP/dt during halothane and enflurane, while left atrial pressure increased only with enflurane.
In a second group of six dogs, verapamil pharmacokinetics were determined in the presence and absence of a ganglionic blocking drug (chlorisondamine, 2 mg • kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> iv).
Blockade of ganglionic transmission resulted in a decrease in both initial volume of distribution and total clearance of verapamil—changes similar to those previously reported with inhalational anesthetics.<jats:sup>4</jats:sup> The authors' data demonstrate the importance of pharmacokinetics in the interaction between verapamil and inhalational anesthetics.
Also demonstrated is the importance of autonomic nervous transmission blockade on the inhalational anesthetic-induced effects of verapamil properties.</jats:p>
Influence of sex and estrous cycle on the effects of acute tryptophan depletion induced by a gelatin-based mixture in adult Wistar rats 1. Neuroscience. 2007 Jun 29;147(2):304-17. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.04.028. Epub 2007 May 25.

Influence of sex and estrous cycle on the effects of acute tryptophan depletion 
induced by a gelatin-based mixture in adult Wistar rats.

Jans LA(1)
 Lieben CK, Blokland A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurocognition, Faculty of Psychology, Maastricht University, 
6200 MD Maastricht, The Netherlands.
l.jans@psychology.unimaas.nl

Women are more vulnerable to develop depression and anxiety disorders than men.
This may be related to higher serotonergic vulnerability in women.
Serotonergic 
vulnerability entails that differences between people in the regulation of 
serotonin (5-HT) determine the vulnerability of an individual to develop 
depression or other 5-HT-related disorders.
The aim of the present experiment 
was to evaluate whether male and female Wistar rats differ in serotonergic 
vulnerability.
Here, a stronger behavioral response to acute tryptophan (TRP) 
depletion was assumed to reflect serotonergic vulnerability.
Twenty-four male 
and 48 female rats were repeatedly subjected to treatment with a gelatin-based 
protein-carbohydrate mixture, either with or without L-tryptophan.
Female 
estrous cycle phase was determined by means of vaginal smears and the females 
were divided into two groups based on their estrous cycle phase: 
pro-estrus/estrus and met-estrus/di-estrus.
Blood samples showed stronger TRP 
depletion in males than females.
There was no effect of estrous cycle on plasma 
TRP concentrations.
In contrast, treatment effects on some brain TRP 
concentrations were influenced by estrous cycle phase, females in 
pro-estrus/estrus showed the strongest response to TRP depletion.
In the open 
field test and home cage emergence test, females in pro-estrus/estrus also 
showed the strongest behavioral response to acute TRP depletion.
In general, 
females showed more activity than males in anxiety-related situations and this 
effect appeared to be enhanced by TRP depletion.
In the social interaction test, 
passive body contact in males and females in pro-estrus/estrus was decreased 
after TRP depletion whereas it was increased in females in the 
met-estrus/di-estrus phase.
Acute TRP depletion affected object recognition, but 
did not affect behavior in the forced swimming test and a reaction time task.
It 
is concluded that sex and estrous cycle phase can influence the behavioral 
response to TRP depletion, and that females in pro-estrus/estrus show the 
strongest behavioral response to acute TRP depletion.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2007.04.028
PMID: 17531394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Comparison of hypotensive activities between synthetic bradykinin and bradykinin analogs in rats]. 1. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 1970 Sep 20;66(5):503-10.

[Comparison of hypotensive activities between synthetic bradykinin and 
bradykinin analogs in rats].

[Article in Japanese]

Kameyama T
 Sasaki K.

PMID: 5529892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects in animal models of depression of lisuride alone and upon co-administration with antidepressants. 1. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 1989 Jul;94(1):81-9. doi: 10.1254/fpj.94.81.

[Effects in animal models of depression of lisuride alone and upon 
coadministration with antidepressants].

[Article in Japanese]

Nakamura K(1)
 Ikoma Y, Kimura K, Nakada Y, Kobayashi S, Yamaguchi M, Nakagawa 
H.

Author information:
(1)Research Department, Nihon Schering K.K., Osaka, Japan.
Effects of lisuride, a central dopamine and serotonin agonist of the ergot type, 
in animal models of depression were investigated in comparison with those of 
desipramine, mianserin and rolipram.
Lisuride, like desipramine and mianserin, 
inhibited reserpine-induced hypothermia in mice (0.5-5.0 mg/kg, i.p.)
and 
suppressed muricide in olfactory bulbectomized rats (ED50 = 0.16 mg/kg, i.p.)
in 
a dose-dependent manner.
The anti-muricidal effect was slightly enhanced by the 
repeated administration of 0.25 mg/kg lisuride.
Lisuride (0.05-0.25 mg/kg, 
i.p.
), like desipramine, dose-dependently reduced the duration of immobility in 
rats forced to swim, and this effect was antagonized by haloperidol.
The 
reduction of immobility time was enhanced by the repeated administration of 
lisuride; at the same time, the ambulation in rats increased.
Furthermore, the 
immobility-reducing effects of desipramine and rolipram were markedly enhanced 
by the co-administration of a low dose of lisuride (0.025 mg/kg, i.p.
), which by 
itself had no effect on the immobility time.
These results indicate that 
lisuride may be useful for the treatment of depression and indicate that a low 
dose of lisuride may enhance the clinical effectiveness of antidepressants such 
as desipramine.
DOI: 10.1254/fpj.94.81
PMID: 2792964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of replacing fish meal with soy protein concentrate and of DL-methionine supplementation in high-energy
 extruded diets on the growth and nutrient utilization of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss.
1.
J Anim Sci.
1999 Nov;77(11):2990-9. doi: 10.2527/1999.77112990x.
Effects of replacing fish meal with soy protein concentrate and of DL-methionine 
supplementation in high-energy, extruded diets on the growth and nutrient 
utilization of rainbow trout, Oncorhynchus mykiss.
Mambrini M(1), Roem AJ, Carvèdi JP, Lallès JP, Kaushik SJ.
Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Nutrition des Poissons, Unité mixte INRA-IFREMER, 
Saint-Pée-sur Nivelle, France.
mambrini@diamant.jouy.inra.fr

Our objectives were to test the potential replacement of fish meal by soy 
protein concentrate (SPC) in high-energy, extruded diets fed to rainbow trout 
(Oncorhynchus mykiss) and to evaluate the efficiency of DL-methionine 
supplementation of soy-based diets.
Groups of trout (initial BW 103 to 106 g) 
were fed to visual satiety with isonitrogenous (6.6% DM) high-energy (22.8 MJ/kg 
DM gross energy), extruded diets, in which fish meal was progressively replaced 
with SPC (0, 50, 75, and 100%).
Three 100% SPC diets were formulated to be 
either unsupplemented or supplemented with DL-methionine, so that total 
methionine content was .8 or 1.0% of DM.
The quality of the SPC source used was 
assessed by measuring the antitryptic and antigenic activities and the 
concentrations of the isoflavones daidzein and genistein.
Apparent digestibility 
of the diets was determined using the indirect method.
A growth trial was 
conducted over 90 d at a water temperature of 18 degrees C. In addition to body 
composition analysis, plasma amino acid concentrations, anti-soy protein 
antibodies in the serum, and isoflavone concentrations in the bile were 
measured.
The SPC source tested exhibited low antitryptic and antigenic 
activities, but it contained high concentrations of isoflavones (1,990 and 5,903 
ppm for daidzein and genistein, respectively).
Protein digestibility was high 
(92%) and was unaffected either the proportion of SPC in the diet or by 
DL-methionine supplementation.
This was also true for the availability of amino 
acids, except phenylalanine.
Digestibility of lipid and energy was reduced by 
19% when SPC totally replaced fish meal.
Growth rate was reduced when more than 
50% of the dietary protein was of soy origin (daily growth coefficient of 3.2 
and 2.1% for the control and the unsupplemented 100% SPC diet, respectively).
The effect on growth was mainly explained by a general decline in feed intake 
(13.7 and 12.0 g DM x kg BW(-1) x d(-1) for the control and the unsupplemented 
100% SPC diet, respectively) and in lipid and, thus, in energy digestibility.
The DL-methionine supplementation partially reversed the depressive effects of 
high dietary SPC incorporation (+13% growth), mainly by enhancing intake.
The 
negative effect of SPC incorporation either may be due to the high isoflavone 
concentration or to an interaction between the soy protein component and the 
dietary lipids.
DOI: 10.2527/1999.77112990x
PMID: 10568469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of β‐Adrenoceptor Agonists on Airway Smooth Muscle and on Slow‐contracting Skeletal Muscle: <i>In Vitro</i> and <i>In Vivo</i> Results Compared <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract</jats:bold> Ten β‐adrenoceptor agonists were examined with respect to a) relaxation of pilocarpine‐contracted trachea and depression of contractions of the soleus muscle of the guinea‐pig <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> and b) counteraction of histamine‐induced bronchospasm and depression of contractions of the soleus muscle of the cat <jats:italic>in vivo.</jats:italic> There was a close correlation between the results obtained <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> and results obtained on the corresponding tissues <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> in spite of the different species used. A close correlation was also observed between effects on airway smooth muscle and on the soleus muscle contractions <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> as well as <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> for all compounds examined.</jats:p>
Inhibition of diphenylhydantoin elimination by its major metabolite. 1. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol. 1972 Sep;4(2):297-306.

Inhibition of diphenylhydantoin elimination by its major metabolite.

Ashley JJ
 Levy G.

PMID: 5074529 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In silico methods to identify meat-derived prolyl endopeptidase inhibitors 1. Food Chem. 2015 May 15;175:337-43. doi: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.11.150. Epub 
2014 Dec 4.

In silico methods to identify meat-derived prolyl endopeptidase inhibitors.

Lafarga T(1)
 O'Connor P(2), Hayes M(3).
Author information:
(1)Teagasc, The Irish Agricultural and Food Development Authority, Food 
BioSciences Department, Ashtown, Dublin 15, Dublin, Ireland.
(2)Teagasc, The Irish Agricultural and Food Development Authority, Food 
BioSciences Department, Moorepark, Fermoy, Cork, Ireland.
(3)Teagasc, The Irish Agricultural and Food Development Authority, Food 
BioSciences Department, Ashtown, Dublin 15, Dublin, Ireland.
Electronic address: 
maria.hayes@teagasc.ie.
According to the World Health Organization (WHO), approximately 450 million 
people suffer from mental or neurological disorders and five of the ten leading 
causes of disability and premature death worldwide are psychiatric conditions.
Social, biological and neurological sciences provided extensive understanding 
into the role of risk and protective factors in the development of mental 
disorders and poor mental health.
Altered activity of a number of enzymes, such 
as prolyl endopeptidase (PEP, EC 3.4.21.26), has been linked to the prevention 
and treatment of a number of mental disorders, including anxiety, depression and 
Alzheimer's disease.
The inhibition of PEP has potential for use in the 
prevention and in the treatment of mental disorders.
The objective of this work 
was to identify PEP-inhibitory peptides from meat proteins using in silico 
methods.
In this paper, five proteins commonly found in meat by-products were 
evaluated as a substrate for use in the generation of PEP inhibitory peptides.
These include serum albumin, collagen and myosin.
These proteins were cleaved in 
silico using BIOPEP and ExPASy PeptideCutter and the generated peptides were 
compared to known PEP-inhibiting peptides in the database of BIOPEP.
A number of 
novel PEP inhibitory peptide sequences were identified in this study, including 
PPL, APPH, IPP and PPG with corresponding IC50 values of 2.86, 3.95, 4.02 and 
2.70 mM, respectively.
This work demonstrates the usefulness of in silico 
analysis for predicting the release of PEP-inhibiting peptides from meat 
proteins.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.foodchem.2014.11.150
PMID: 25577089 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Down-Regulation of KCC2 Expression and Phosphorylation in Motoneurons
 and Increases the Number of in Primary Afferent Projections to Motoneurons in Mice with Post-Stroke Spasticity 1.
PLoS One.
2014 Dec 29;9(12):e114328.
doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114328.
eCollection 2014.
Down-regulation of KCC2 expression and phosphorylation in motoneurons, and 
increases the number of in primary afferent projections to motoneurons in mice 
with post-stroke spasticity.
Toda T(1), Ishida K(1), Kiyama H(2), Yamashita T(3), Lee S(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Physical and Occupational Therapy, Graduate School of Medicine, 
Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.
(2)Department of Functional Anatomy and Neuroscience, Graduate School of 
Medicine, Nagoya University, Nagoya, Japan.
(3)Department of Molecular Neuroscience, Graduate School of Medicine, Osaka 
University, Osaka, Japan.
Spasticity obstructs motor function recovery post-stroke, and has been reported 
to occur in spinal cord injury and electrophysiological studies.
The purpose of 
the present study was to assess spinal cord circuit spasticity in post-stroke 
mice.
At 3, 7, 21, and 42 d after photothrombotic ischemic cortical injury in 
C57BL/6J mice, we observed decreased rate-dependent depression (RDD) of the 
Hoffmann reflex (H reflex) in the affected forelimb of mice compared with the 
limbs of sham mice and the non-affected forelimb.
This finding suggests a 
hyper-excitable stretch reflex in the affected forelimb.
We then performed 
immunohistochemical and western blot analyses to examine the expression of the 
potassium-chloride cotransporter 2 (KCC2) and phosphorylation of the KCC2 serine 
residue, 940 (S940), since this is the main chloride extruder that affects 
neuronal excitability.
We also performed immunohistochemical analyses on the 
number of vesicular glutamate transporter 1 (vGluT1)-positive boutons to count 
the number of Ia afferent fibers that connect to motoneurons.
Western bolts 
revealed that, compared with sham mice, experimental mice had significantly 
reduced KCC2 expression at 7 d post-stroke, and dephosphorylated S940 at 3 and 7 
d post-stroke in motoneuron plasma membranes.
We also observed a lower density 
of KCC2-positive areas in the plasma membrane of motoneurons at 3 and 7 d 
post-stroke.
However, western blot and immunohistochemical analyses revealed 
that there were no differences between groups 21 and 42 d post-stroke, 
respectively.
In addition, at 7 and 42 d post-stroke, experimental mice 
exhibited a significant increase in vGluT1 boutons compared with sham mice.
Our 
findings suggest that both the down-regulation of KCC2 and increases in Ia 
afferent fibers are involved in post-stroke spasticity.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0114328
PMCID: PMC4278744
PMID: 25546454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
[Percutaneous resorption of corticosteroids. II. Resorption of flucocinolone acetonide through normal rat skin and its influence]. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1968 May;18(5):580-5.

[Percutaneous resorption of corticosteroids. II. Resorption of flucocinolone 
acetonide through normal rat skin and its influence].

[Article in German]

Brode E.

PMID: 4303730 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Further study of the immunological stimulation of tumor growth in rat vaccination with the tissue of rat sarcoma 45
 treated with Lonin-3].
1.
Patol Fiziol Eksp Ter.
1966 Jul-Aug;10(4):57-62.
[Further study of the immunological stimulation of tumor growth in rat 
vaccination with the tissue of rat sarcoma 45, treated with Lonin-3].
[Article in Russian]

Montsevichiute-Erigene EV.
PMID: 5237744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The cytoprotective effect of inulin-type hexasaccharide extracted from Morinda officinalis on PC12 cells against the lesion induced by corticosterone 1. Life Sci. 2004 Aug 13;75(13):1531-8. doi: 10.1016/j.lfs.2004.02.029.

The cytoprotective effect of inulin-type hexasaccharide extracted from Morinda 
officinalis on PC12 cells against the lesion induced by corticosterone.

Li YF(1)
 Liu YQ, Yang M, Wang HL, Huang WC, Zhao YM, Luo ZP.
Author information:
(1)Division of Psychopharmacology, Beijing Institute of Pharmacology and 
Toxicology, 27 TaiPing Road, Beijing 100850, China.
lyf619@yahoo.com.cn

High concentration of corticosterone (Cort) 0.2 mM was incubated with PC12 cells 
to simulate the lesion state of brain neurons in depressive illness, it was 
found that the inulin-type oligosaccharides extracted from Morinda officinalis, 
inulin-type hexasaccharide (IHS) at the doses of 0.625, 1.25 microM or 
desipramine (DIM) 0.25, 1 microM protected the PC12 cells from the lesion 
induced by Cort.
With Fura-2/AM labeling assay, DIM 0.25, 1 microM or IHS 2.5, 
10 microM attenuated the intracellular Ca2+ overloading induced by Cort 0.1 mM 
for 48 h in PC12 cells.
Using RT-PCR, treatment with Cort 0.1 mM for 48 h 
decreased the nerve growth factor (NGF) mRNA level in PC12 cells, IHS 5, 10 
microM reversed this change.
In summary, IHS attenuate the intracellular Ca2+ 
overloading and thereby up-regulate the NGF mRNA expression in Cort-treated PC12 
cells, which may be consisted at least part of the cytopretective effect of IHS.
These results also extend evidence for our hypothesis that neuroprotective 
action is one of the common mechanisms for antidepressants.
DOI: 10.1016/j.lfs.2004.02.029
PMID: 15261759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enhancing brain adenosine signaling with the nucleoside transport blocker NBTI (S-(4-nitrobenzyl)-6-theoinosine) mimics the effects of inescapable shock on later shuttle-escape performance in rats. 1. Behav Neurosci. 2008 Dec;122(6):1236-47. doi: 10.1037/a0013143.

Enhancing brain adenosine signaling with the nucleoside transport blocker NBTI 
(S-(4-nitrobenzyl)-6-theoinosine) mimics the effects of inescapable shock on 
later shuttle-escape performance in rats.

Minor TR(1)
 Rowe M, Cullen PK, Furst S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Brain Research Institute, University of California 
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA 90095-1563, USA.
minor@psych.ucla.edu

Experience with unsignaled, inescapable shock represents a profound challenge to 
brain metabolic function and physiology.
The authors have argued that behavioral 
impairment following this traumatic stress is a consequence of enhanced brain 
adenosine signaling, which promotes metabolic recovery by profoundly inhibiting 
neural activation.
The authors tested this hypothesis by artificially increasing 
extracellular brain adenosine concentration by blocking uptake transport with 
NBTI in rats given only restraint stress in five experiments.
NBTI impaired 
shuttle-escape performance in the manner of inescapable shock in a 
dose-dependent manner and acted synergistically with an ineffective number of 
inescapable shocks to maximally impair test performance.
These deficits produced 
by inescapable shock and NBTI were reversed by the nonselective adenosine 
receptor antagonist caffeine, and the highly selective A-sub(2A) receptor 
antagonist CSC (8-(3-chloro-styrl)caffeine).
The highly selective A-sub-1 
receptor antagonist DPCPX (8-Cyclopentyl-1,3-Dipropylxanthine) failed to improve 
performance in rats preexposed to inescapable shock or pretreated with NBTI.
These data suggest that enhanced adenosine signaling at a brain A-sub(2A) 
receptor impairs escape performance following inescapable shock in the learned 
helplessness paradigm.
DOI: 10.1037/a0013143
PMID: 19045943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Bioelectrical and mechanical effects of tiapamil (Ro 11-1781) on isolated guinea pig myocardium 1. Cardiovasc Res. 1986 Jan;20(1):42-51. doi: 10.1093/cvr/20.1.42.

Bioelectrical and mechanical effects of tiapamil (Ro 11-1781) on isolated guinea 
pig myocardium.

Späh F.

In isolated electrically stimulated guinea pig papillary muscles tiapamil exerts 
a negative inotropic action that corresponds to its presumptive inhibitory 
effects on the slow-channel-mediated transmembrane Ca2+ influx. However
 
contractile depression is always accompanied by marked alterations of the normal 
Na+-carried action potential.
Thus Na+-dependent upstroke velocity (dV/dtmax) 
declines while the length of the plateau phase increases.
These observations 
indicate that tiapamil, besides inhibiting Ca2+ inflow, also interferes with the 
fast inward Na+ current and possibly also reduces the repolarising K+ efflux.
After partial depolarisation with a K+-rich tyrode solution (19 mmol X litre-1 
K+).
tiapamil lowers the Ca2+-dependent contractile force as it reduces the 
bioelectric parameters (upstroke velocity, amplitude, duration) of the 
Ca2+-mediated action potentials.
Moreover, in partially depolarised myocardium, 
the Mg2+-induced bioelectric membrane activity is suppressed by tiapamil.
Tiapamil probably operates as an agent with mixed Na+-, K+-, Ca2+- and 
Mg2+-antagonistic effects and, in this respect, differs considerably from the 
more specific Ca2+ antagonists such as verapamil, D 600 (gallopamil), nifedipine 
(and other 1,4-dihydropyridines) or diltiazem.
However, tiapamil by virtue of 
its combined damping actions on both transmembrane Na+ and Ca2+ conductivities 
(together with prolongation of the action potential plateau), is a drug which 
exerts, simultaneously, the fundamental myocardial membrane effects of 
antiarrhythmic agents of group I, III and IV, according to the classification of 
Singh and Vaughan Williams.
Thus these bioelectrical observations are in 
accordance with the results of clinical studies on tiapamil, which have 
demonstrated directly its antiarrhythmic efficacy.
DOI: 10.1093/cvr/20.1.42
PMID: 3708640 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A Comparison of the Response of Woodchucks and Rats to Variations in Dietary Lipotrope and Lipid Content 1. J Nutr. 1985 Sep;115(9):1136-46. doi: 10.1093/jn/115.9.1136.

A comparison of the response of woodchucks and rats to variations in dietary 
lipotrope and lipid content.

Boyd JN
 Graham ES, Graham TC, Tennant BC.
A soy protein-based experimental diet for woodchucks (Marmota monax) is 
described.
The diet supported growth of juvenile woodchucks for 12 wk.
With this 
diet, the effects on both woodchucks and rats of increasing dietary corn oil 
from 5 to 15% and of deleting supplemental lipotropic factors (choline, 
methionine, folic acid and vitamin B-12) were studied in a 2 X 2 factorial 
experiment.
Both increased lipid and lipotrope deletion resulted in decreased 
growth in rats, but only increased lipid caused growth depression in woodchucks.
Lipotrope depletion resulted in elevated serum markers of hepatic injury and 
hepatic lipid accumulation in rats but not in woodchucks.
Hematological changes 
induced by the low lipotrope diets included decreased packed cell volume, total 
hemoglobin and mean corpuscular volume (MCV) in rats but increased MCV in 
woodchucks.
The woodchuck appears to be more resistant than the rat to induction 
of hepatic injury by lipotrope deficiency.
DOI: 10.1093/jn/115.9.1136
PMID: 4032061 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Frequency-dependent effects of calcium antagonists on atrioventricular conduction and refractoriness: demonstration and characterization in anesthetized dogs. <jats:p>Calcium-channel blockers are known to affect slow inward current in a frequency-dependent fashion. The purpose of these experiments was to study use-dependent effects of verapamil
 diltiazem, and nifedipine on atrioventricular conduction in vivo.
Loading and maintenance infusion techniques were developed to study each drug at a series of stable plasma concentrations in autonomically blocked dogs anesthetized with morphine and alpha-chloralose.
All three agents produced changes in atrioventricular conduction and refractoriness that increased with increasing stimulation frequency.
The time dependence of drug-induced changes in atrioventricular conduction was characterized both by varying the coupling of single test stimuli and by abruptly changing activation frequency.
The time constants for onset of (tau on) and recovery from (tau off) block were typical for each drug, with nifedipine having a faster time constant (tau off = 0.36 +/- 0.12 sec) than verapamil (tau off = 3.2 +/- 1.0 sec, tau on = 28 +/- 8 sec) or diltiazem (tau off = 2.7 +/- 1.2 sec, tau on = 13 +/- 4 sec).
The time constants for each drug were independent of concentration but the magnitude of time-dependent change increased with increasing drug concentration.
We conclude that calcium-channel blockers have important frequency-dependent effects on atrioventricular conduction in vivo.
This frequency dependence may result in selective depression of atrioventricular conduction in the presence of supraventricular tachyarrhythmias, with important potential implications for the clinical use of these agents.</jats:p>
Nicotine
 Smoking and Cortical Inhibition 1.
Nature.
1968 Jul 6;219(5149):89-91. doi: 10.1038/219089a0.
Nicotine, smoking and cortical inhibition.
Phillis JW, York DH.
DOI: 10.1038/219089a0
PMID: 5659634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Effect of Phenobarbital on the Turnover of Microsomal Phospholipid in Male and Female Rats 1. J Biol Chem. 1968 Jun 10;243(11):3020-8.

The effect of phenobarbital on the turnover of microsomal phospholipid in male 
and female rats.

Holtzman JL
 Gillette JR.

PMID: 5653188 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Use-dependent facilitation and depression of ?-type Ca2+ current in guinea-pig ventricular myocytes: modulation by Ca2+ and isoprenaline 1. Cardiovasc Res. 1999 Nov;44(2):381-9. doi: 10.1016/s0008-6363(99)00216-3.

Use-dependent facilitation and depression of L-type Ca2+ current in guinea-pig 
ventricular myocytes: modulation by Ca2+ and isoprenaline.

Bates SE(1)
 Gurney AM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, University of Strathclyde, 
Strathclyde Institute for Biomedical Sciences, Glasgow, UK.
OBJECTIVE: An increase in stimulation frequency can facilitate or depress 
cardiac Ca2+ current (ICa).
The aim was to examine the Ca2+ dependence of these 
effects, to determine if facilitation is sustained, and to elucidate the 
mechanism by which isoprenaline modulates facilitation.
METHODS: We examined the effects of increasing the stimulation frequency for 1 
min, from 0.05 to 1 Hz, on ICa recorded from guinea-pig ventricular myocytes, 
using the whole-cell, voltage-clamp technique.
RESULTS: 1 Hz stimulation caused a facilitation of ICa that peaked in 5 s and 
was followed by depression towards the basal level.
Metabolic inhibitors or 
replacement of extracellular Ca2+ with Ba2+ abolished facilitation without 
affecting depression, implying that they are independent processes and that 
facilitation required ATP and Ca2+.
Subtraction of the depression observed in 
either condition, from the response to 1 Hz stimulation recorded under control 
conditions, revealed that ICa facilitation was well maintained during 1 Hz 
stimulation.
Increased intracellular Ca2+ buffering reduced both phases of the 
response.
Furthermore, varying the extracellular Ca2+ concentration ([Ca2+]o) 
revealed a Ca(2+)-dependent enhancement of depression and a bell-shaped 
dependence of facilitation on [Ca2+]o. Facilitation increased with [Ca2+]o up to 
1 mM, then declined at higher concentrations due to partial masking by the 
overlaping depression.
Isoprenaline produced concentration-dependent inhibition 
of facilitation and enhancement of depression when pipettes contained 2 mM EGTA, 
but not BAPTA.
For an equivalent increase in ICa amplitude, the effects of 
isoprenaline and elevated [Ca2+]o on the response to 1 Hz stimulation were 
quantitatively the same.
CONCLUSIONS: Facilitation is sustained during increased activity, but appears 
transient due to overlapping depression.
Both responses are promoted by 
increased submembrane [Ca2+].
Isoprenaline appears to modulate facilitation and 
depression as a consequence of increased Ca2+ influx, rather than cAMP-dependent 
phosphorylation.
The apparent block of facilitation by isoprenaline may result 
from masking by the enhanced depression.
DOI: 10.1016/s0008-6363(99)00216-3
PMID: 10690314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pharmacokinetics and antidepressant activity of fluoxetine in transgenic mice with elevated serum alpha-1-acid glycoprotein levels. 1. Drug Metab Dispos. 1998 Jan;26(1):20-4.

Pharmacokinetics and antidepressant activity of fluoxetine in transgenic mice 
with elevated serum alpha-1-acid glycoprotein levels.

Holladay JW(1)
 Dewey MJ, Yoo SD.
Author information:
(1)College of Pharmacy, Howard University, Washington, DC 20059, USA.
Fluoxetine, a novel selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor utilized in the 
treatment of depression, is avidly bound to serum albumin and alpha-1-acid 
glycoprotein (AAG).
AAG is an acute phase protein, and its serum levels are 
elevated in a variety of pathophysiological conditions including inflammation, 
depression, cancer, and acquired autoimmune deficiency syndrome.
Further, the 
pharmacokinetic disposition and pharmacological activity of several highly bound 
drugs have been reported to be significantly altered as a result of elevated 
serum AAG.
We investigated the effects of elevated serum AAG levels on the 
pharmacokinetic disposition, antidepressant activity, and steady state profile 
of fluoxetine and its demethylated metabolite, norfluoxetine.
This was 
approached utilizing a novel strain of transgenic mice that expressed 
genetically elevated serum AAG levels severalfold over those of control mice.
Serum and brain drug concentrations were determined by HPLC after fluoxetine 
administration.
In transgenic mice, the volume of distribution and the terminal 
elimination half-life of fluoxetine were significantly reduced.
Further, 
significant reductions in brain-to-serum fluoxetine concentration ratios and 
antidepressant activity were observed in transgenic mice, despite having higher 
serum drug levels than control mice.
This trend in the serum continued at steady 
state, and brain fluoxetine levels were significantly lower in transgenic mice.
The results of this study provide valuable insights regarding the consequences 
of elevated serum AAG levels, often seen in several disease states, on the 
pharmacokinetic disposition of fluoxetine.
PMID: 9443847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ventrolateral Origin of Each Cycle of Rhythmic Activity Generated by the Spinal Cord of the Chick Embryo 1. PLoS One. 2007 May 2;2(5):e417. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000417.

Ventrolateral origin of each cycle of rhythmic activity generated by the spinal 
cord of the chick embryo.

Arai Y(1)
 Mentis GZ, Wu JY, O'Donovan MJ.
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neural Control, Section on Developmental Neurobiology, National 
Institute of Neurological Disorders and Stroke (NINDS), National Institutes of 
Health (NIH), Bethesda, Maryland, United States of America.
BACKGROUND: The mechanisms responsible for generating rhythmic motor activity in 
the developing spinal cord of the chick embryo are poorly understood.
Here we 
investigate whether the activity of motoneurons occurs before other neuronal 
populations at the beginning of each cycle of rhythmic discharge.
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: The spatiotemporal organization of neural 
activity in transverse slices of the lumbosacral cord of the chick embryo 
(E8-E11) was investigated using intrinsic and voltage-sensitive dye (VSD) 
imaging.
VSD signals accompanying episodes of activity comprised a rhythmic 
decrease in light transmission that corresponded to each cycle of electrical 
activity recorded from the ipsilateral ventral root.
The rhythmic signals were 
widely synchronized across the cord face, and the largest signal amplitude was 
in the ventrolateral region where motoneurons are located.
In unstained slices 
we recorded two classes of intrinsic signal.
In the first, an episode of 
rhythmic activity was accompanied by a slow decrease in light transmission that 
peaked in the dorsal horn and decayed dorsoventrally.
Superimposed on this 
signal was a much smaller rhythmic increase in transmission that was coincident 
with each cycle of discharge and whose amplitude and spatial distribution was 
similar to that of the VSD signals.
At the onset of a spontaneously occurring 
episode and each subsequent cycle, both the intrinsic and VSD signals originated 
within the lateral motor column and spread medially and then dorsally.
By 
contrast, following a dorsal root stimulus, the optical signals originated 
within the dorsal horn and traveled ventrally to reach the lateral motor column.
CONCLUSIONS/SIGNIFICANCE: These findings suggest that motoneuron activity 
contributes to the initiation of each cycle of rhythmic activity, and that 
motoneuron and/or R-interneuron synapses are a plausible site for the 
activity-dependent synaptic depression that modeling studies have identified as 
a critical mechanism for cycling within an episode.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0000417
PMCID: PMC1855078
PMID: 17479162 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Suppression by noradrenaline of catecholamine secretion from adrenal medulla 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1974 Oct;28(2):384-6. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(74)90294-5.

Suppression by noradrenaline of catecholamine secretion from adrenal medulla.

Gutman Y
 Boonyaviroj P.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(74)90294-5
PMID: 4423752 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antiarrhythmic effects of ethmozin in cardiac Purkinje fibers: suppression of automaticity and abolition of triggering. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1983 Dec;227(3):578-86.

Antiarrhythmic effects of ethmozin in cardiac Purkinje fibers: suppression of 
automaticity and abolition of triggering.

Dangman KH
 Hoffman BF.
The effects of ethmozin were studied on automatic and triggered impulse 
initiation in isolated canine cardiac Purkinje fibers using standard 
microelectrode technique.
In driven Purkinje fibers with normal (greater than or 
equal to -80 mV) maximum diastolic potentials, ethmozin (2-4 mg/l or 4.3-8.6 
muM) slightly increased the slope of phase 4 depolarization.
However, the rate 
of normal automatic firing in such fibers was decreased by ethmozin and the 
threshold (take-off) potential of the pacemaker cells was shifted in the 
depolarizing direction (toward zero potential).
In fibers treated with barium 
chloride (0.10-0.50 mM), "abnormal automaticity" occurred from maximum diastolic 
potentials of -38 to -68 MV.
Ethmozin (2-4 mg/l) consistently slowed and 
abolished this abnormal automaticity.
This appeared to be associated with a 
decrease in the rate of diastolic depolarization.
When lidocaine, 4 or 10 mg/l 
(17 or 42 muM), was tested on abnormal automaticity induced by barium, it too 
was found to decrease the rate of diastolic depolarization and decrease the 
automatic rate.
However, lidocaine never terminated barium-induced abnormal 
automaticity.
Ethmozin also consistently abolished abnormal automaticity in 
Purkinje fibers taken from the endocardial surface of 24- or 48-h infarct zones.
Finally, ethmozin (1-4 mg/l or 2.2-8.6 muM) depressed the amplitude of delayed 
after depolarizations and terminated triggered activity in Purkinje fibers taken 
from 24-hr infarct zones.
Each of these actions could contribute to the 
antiarrhythmic effects of ethmozin.
PMID: 6317840 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression by morphine of activity in the ventrolateral tract evoked from cutaneous a-fibres 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1974 Nov;29(1):171-4. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(74)90186-1.

Depression by morphine of activity in the ventrolateral tract evoked from 
cutaneous A-fibres.

Grossmann W
 Jurna I.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(74)90186-1
PMID: 4435039 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of anxiolytic
 antidepressant, and antipsychotic drugs on cocaine-induced seizures and mortality 1.
Epilepsy Behav.
2004 Dec;5(6):852-6. doi: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2004.07.012.
Effect of anxiolytic, antidepressant, and antipsychotic drugs on cocaine-induced 
seizures and mortality.
Macêdo DS(1), Santos RS, Belchior LD, Neto MA, Vasconcelos SM, Lima VT, Fonteles 
MM, Viana GS, de Sousa FC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Federal University of Ceará, 
Ceará, Brazil.
Cocaine abuse may lead to overdose (related to seizures and/or status 
epilepticus) and to diseases (schizophrenia, depression, and anxiety).
This work 
was designed to study the influence of drugs used to treat psychopathologies 
associated with cocaine abuse on cocaine-induced seizures and mortality in mice.
Fluoxetine (10, 20, 40 mg/kg), imipramine and buspirone (5, 10 mg/kg), pimozide 
(10, 20 mg/kg), lithium (56.3, 112.5 mg/kg), and naltrexone (25, 50 mg/kg) were 
administered intraperitoneally, 30 minutes prior to cocaine (90 mg/kg, ip).
The 
animals were observed (30 minutes) to determine: latency to first seizure, 
number of seizures, and number of deaths after cocaine overdose.
Fluoxetine, 
imipramine, buspirone, and pimozide had pro- or anticonvulsant effects depending 
on the dose.
Smaller doses protected and higher doses increased cocaine-induced 
seizures and/or mortality.
Naltrexone worsened and lithium protected against 
seizures.
Thus, these results suggest that caution should be taken in the 
selection of pharmacotherapy and dosages for patients with cocaine addiction 
because of the possibility of potentiating cocaine toxicity.
DOI: 10.1016/j.yebeh.2004.07.012
PMID: 15582832 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of sodium octanoate on leucine incorporation into protein of rat liver slices and of Yoshida ascites hepatoma cells 1. Experientia. 1978 Feb 15;34(2):232-3. doi: 10.1007/BF01944698.

Effect of sodium octanoate on leucine incorporation into protein of rat liver 
slices and of Yoshida ascites hepatoma cells.

Agostini C.

7.38 X 10(-4) M octanoate does not significantly modify leucine incorporation 
into protein of rat liver slices
 while in hepatoma cells a 19% inhibition has 
been noted.
3.69 x 10(-3) M octanoate reduces leucine incorporation to about the 
same extent (71-76%) in both liver slices and hepatoma cells.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01944698
PMID: 203476 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Necrotising fasciitis associated with<i>Escherichia coli</i>in a dog 1. N Z Vet J. 2005 Aug;53(4):257-60. doi: 10.1080/00480169.2005.36556.

Necrotising fasciitis associated with Escherichia coli in a dog.

Worth AJ(1)
 Marshall N, Thompson KG.
Author information:
(1)Massey University Veterinary Teaching Hospital, Institute of Veterinary, 
Animal and Biomedical Sciences, Massey University, Private Bag 11222, Palmerston 
North, New Zealand.
A.J.Worth@massey.ac.nz

CASE HISTORY: Lameness and limb pain associated with a laceration in the inner 
thigh of a Border Collie dog progressed over 4 days to extensive necrosis of the 
full-thickness of skin and subcutaneous (S/C) tissue.
A successful outcome was 
achieved using surgical debridement and intensive supportive care, followed by 
limited local closure, axial pattern flap development, and free skin grafting.
CLINICAL FINDINGS: Clinical findings included severe pain, depression, pyrexia 
and hypoalbuminaemia, and full-thickness loss of skin from the caudal thigh to 
the hock.
Histopathologically, debrided tissue showed extensive necrosis of the 
dermis, adipose and muscle tissues, and the presence of numerous Gram-negative 
rods.
Escherichia coli was cultured from deep tissue samples.
DIAGNOSIS: Necrotising fasciitis (NF) associated with E. coli infection.
CLINICAL RELEVANCE: NF associated with E. coli has not been previously reported 
in dogs.
The importance of early diagnosis and surgical debridement is noted and 
the relevant medical literature is reviewed.
DOI: 10.1080/00480169.2005.36556
PMID: 16044187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fetal asphyctic preconditioning protects against perinatal asphyxia-induced behavioral consequences in adulthood 1. Behav Brain Res. 2010 Apr 2;208(2):343-51. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.11.040.
Epub  2009 Dec 3.

Fetal asphyctic preconditioning protects against perinatal asphyxia-induced 
behavioral consequences in adulthood.

Strackx E(1)
 Van den Hove DL, Prickaerts J, Zimmermann L, Steinbusch HW, Blanco 
CE, Gavilanes AW, Vles JS.
Author information:
(1)School for Mental Health and Neuroscience, Faculty of Health, Medicine and 
Life Sciences, Maastricht University, European Graduate School of Neuroscience 
(EURON), Maastricht, The Netherlands.
Perinatal asphyxia is one of the major causes of neuronal injury and impaired 
development in infants.
We recently have shown that a brief episode of 
experimental fetal asphyxia (FA) can provoke an endogenous neuroprotection 
against subsequent severe perinatal asphyxia (SPA).
The long-lasting functional 
consequences of FA preconditioning are not clear yet.
The aim of the study was 
to determine if FA preconditioning can provide a long-lasting behavioral 
protection against SPA.
FA was induced, as a preconditioning stimulus, by 
clamping the uterine vasculature for 30 min on E17.
At birth, SPA was induced by 
placing the uterine horns in a water bath for 19 min.
At 6 months of age, 
functional outcome was assessed using different behavioral tests: the open field 
for locomotor activity, the elevated zero maze for anxiety-related behavior, the 
forced swim test for depression-related behavior and the object recognition task 
for cognition.
Data showed that FA preconditioning improved postnatal mortality 
after SPA.
At the age of 6 months, the total distance moved in the open field 
and elevated zero maze was significantly less in the SPA group compared to the 
control groups.
In addition, cognitive performance in the object recognition 
task was impaired in the SPA offspring compared to the control groups.
Most 
importantly, FA preconditioning was able to preserve both locomotor activity and 
cognition function.
In conclusion, FA preconditioning induces a long-lasting, 
functional protection against SPA.
Therefore, this model seems to offer good 
opportunities for the identification and characterization of the underlying 
mechanisms of preconditioning.
Copyright 2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.11.040
PMID: 19962408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Behavioral stress modifies hippocampal plasticity through N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor activation. <jats:p>Behavioral stress has detrimental effects on subsequent cognitive performance in many species
 including humans.
For example, humans exposed to stressful situations typically exhibit marked deficits in various learning and memory tasks.
However, the underlying neural mechanisms by which stress exerts its effects on learning and memory are unknown.
We now report that in adult male rats, stress (i.e., restraint plus tailshock) impairs long-term potentiation (LTP) but enhances long-term depression (LTD) in the CA1 area of the hippocampus, a structure implicated in learning and memory processes.
These effects on LTP and LTD are prevented when the animals were given CGP39551 (the carboxyethylester of CGP 37849; DL-(E)-2-amino-4-methyl-5-phosphono-3-pentenoic acid), a competitive N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor antagonist, before experiencing stress.
In contrast, the anxiolytic drug diazepam did not block the stress effects on hippocampal plasticity.
Thus, the effects of stress on subsequent LTP and LTD appear to be mediated through the activation of the NMDA subtype of glutamate receptors.
Such modifications in hippocampal plasticity may contribute to learning and memory impairments associated with stress.</jats:p>
Central and Peripheral Catecholamine Levels after Pyrazole Treatment <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> Pyrazole (50 to 300 mg/kg intraperitoneally) given to male rats produced a decrease in body weight. A dose dependent fall in the noradrenaline content of the brain was observed
 but no changes occurred in the central levels of dopamine or 5‐hydroxytryptamine.
Even a single dose of pyrazole (100 mg/kg) decreased the noradrenaline content by 20 %.
Successive doses had an additive effect which was maximal 24 hrs after the final dose.
Recovery was quite rapid, but 3 days after the final administration the levels were still lower than in the controls.
The noradrenaline content of the heart and spleen was also slightly reduced.
The adrenaline content of the adrenals seemed unaffected by the treatment.
It is concluded that pyrazole administration in the dose and time schedules used, markedly reduces the noradrenaline content of the central nervous system.
This should be kept in mind when this substance is combined with ethanol in similar studies.</jats:p>
[The effect of aphidicolin on trochoblast differentiation in the early ontogeny of polychaetes]. 1. Ontogenez. 1996 Nov-Dec;27(6):419-26.

[The effect of aphidicolin on trochoblast differentiation in the early ontogeny 
of polychaetes].

[Article in Russian]

Dondua AK(1)
 Dorresteijn AW, Kostiuchenko RP, Fedorova ZhE, Fisher A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Embryology, St. Petersburg University, Russia.
The differentiation of trochoblasts in Nereis virens and Platynereis dumerlii 
embryos was investigated during different periods of time after fertilization by 
means of the DNA replication block.
It was shown that the quantal cycle of 
ciliogenesis is not connected directly with the time of primary trochoblast 
founder cell formation.
Development of the cilia on trochoblasts in P. dumerlii 
needed normal DNA replication at the fifth cycle.
Ciliogenesis in N. virens 
completely stopped after the inhibition of replication of the fourth cycle and 
only partly when the fifth and sixth rounds of DNA replication were affected.
The data obtained are discussed from the standpoint of Newport and Kirschner's 
depletion hypothesis.
PMID: 9053830 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Introgression patterns in the mosaic hybrid zone between<i>Mytilus edulis</i>and<i>M. galloprovincialis</i> <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Hybrid zones are fascinating systems to investigate the structure of genetic barriers. Marine hybrid zones deserve more investigation because of the generally high dispersion potential of planktonic larvae which allows migration on scales unrivalled by terrestrial species. Here we analyse the genetic structure of the mosaic hybrid zone between the marine mussels<jats:italic>Mytilus edulis</jats:italic>and<jats:italic>M. galloprovincialis</jats:italic>
 using three length‐polymorphic PCR loci as neutral and diagnostic markers on 32 samples along the Atlantic coast of Europe.
Instead of a single genetic gradient from<jats:italic>M.
galloprovincialis</jats:italic>on the Iberian Peninsula to<jats:italic>M.
edulis</jats:italic>populations in the North Sea, three successive transitions were observed in France.
From South to North, the frequency of alleles typical of<jats:italic>M.
galloprovincialis</jats:italic>first decreases in the southern Bay of Biscay, remains low in Charente, then increases in South Brittany, remains high in most of Brittany, and finally decreases again in South Normandy.
The two enclosed patches observed in the midst of the mosaic hybrid zone in Charente and Brittany, although predominantly<jats:italic>M.
edulis</jats:italic>‐like and<jats:italic>M.
galloprovincialis</jats:italic>‐like, respectively, are genetically original in two respects.
First, considering only the various alleles typical of one species, the patches show differentiated frequencies compared to the reference external populations.
Second, each patch is partly introgressed by alleles of the other species.
When introgression is taken into account, linkage disequilibria appear close to their maximum possible values, indicating a strong genetic barrier within all transition zones.
Some pre‐ or postzygotic isolation mechanisms (habitat specialization, spawning asynchrony, assortative fertilization and hybrid depression) have been documented in previous studies, although their relative importance remains to be evaluated.
We also provided evidence for a recent migratory ‘short‐cut’ connecting<jats:italic>M.
edulis</jats:italic>‐like populations of the Charente patch to an external<jats:italic>M.
edulis</jats:italic>population in Normandy and thought to reflect artificial transfer of spat for aquaculture.</jats:p>
Direct measurement of adenosine release during hypoxia in the CA1 region of the rat hippocampal slice 1. J Physiol. 2000 Jul 1;526 Pt 1(Pt 1):143-55. doi: 
10.1111/j.1469-7793.2000.00143.x.

Direct measurement of adenosine release during hypoxia in the CA1 region of the 
rat hippocampal slice.

Dale N(1)
 Pearson T, Frenguelli BG.
Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, University of Warwick, Coventry CV4 7AL, 
UK.
We have used an enzyme-based, twin-barrelled sensor to measure adenosine release 
during hypoxia in the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices in conjunction with 
simultaneous extracellular field recordings of excitatory synaptic transmission.
When loaded with a combination of adenosine deaminase, nucleoside phosphorylase 
and xanthine oxidase, the sensor responded linearly to exogenous adenosine over 
the concentration range 10 nM to 20 microM.
Without enzymes, the sensor when 
placed on the surface of hippocampal slices recorded a very small net signal 
during hypoxia of 40 +/- 43 pA (mean +/- s.e.m.
; n = 7).
Only when one barrel 
was loaded with the complete sequence of enzymes and the other with the last two 
in the cascade did the sensor record a large net difference signal during 
hypoxia (1226 +/- 423 pA; n = 7).
This signal increased progressively during the 
hypoxic episode, scaled with the hypoxic depression of the simultaneously 
recorded field excitatory postsynaptic potential and was greatly reduced (67 +/- 
6.5 %; n = 9) by coformycin (0.5-2 microM), a selective inhibitor of adenosine 
deaminase, the first enzyme in the enzymic cascade within the sensor.
For 5 min 
hypoxic episodes, the sensor recorded a peak concentration of adenosine of 5.6 
+/- 1.2 microM (n = 16) with an IC(50) for the depression of transmission of 
approximately 3 microM.
In slices pre-incubated for 3-6 h in nominally 
Ca(2+)-free artificial cerebrospinal fluid, 5 min of hypoxia resulted in an 
approximately 9-fold greater release of adenosine (48.9 +/- 17.7 microM; n = 6).
High extracellular Ca(2+) (4 mM) both reduced the adenosine signal recorded by 
the sensor during hypoxia (3.5 +/- 0.6 microM; n = 4) and delayed the hypoxic 
depression of excitatory synaptic transmission.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1469-7793.2000.00143.x
PMCID: PMC2269993
PMID: 10878107 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pancreatitis Associated with N-Methyl-Glucamine Therapy in a Dog with Leishmaniasis 1. Vet Res Commun. 2005 Aug;29 Suppl 2:269-72. doi: 10.1007/s11259-005-0059-4.

Pancreatitis associated with N-methyl-glucamine therapy in a dog with 
leishmaniasis.

Aste G(1)
 Di Tommaso M, Steiner JM, Williams DA, Boari A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, Section of Internal Medicine, 
Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, University of Teramo, 64100, Teramo, Italy.
gaste@unite.it

DOI: 10.1007/s11259-005-0059-4
PMID: 16244972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Adaptation of the body to stressors prevents the cardiotoxic effect of rifampicin but not polymyxin B]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1991 Oct;112(10):344-5.

[Adaptation of the body to stressors prevents the cardiotoxic effect of 
rifampicin but not polymyxin B].

[Article in Russian]

Malyshev IIu
 Meerson FZ.
It was established on isolated rat hearts that adaptation of the organism to 
stress exposure effectively limits toxic effect of chronic rifampicin 
administration (7 mg/kg/day for 8 days) and does not affect the depression of 
contractile function induced by chronic polymyxin B administration (0.12 
mg/kg/day for 8 days).
Possible mechanism of the effect of organism's adaptation 
to stress on the resistance of heart to antibiotics is under discussion.
PMID: 1804336 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ethanol and pentobarbital inhibition of intrasynaptosomal sequestration of calcium 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1981 Dec 1;30(23):3209-15. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(81)90520-7.

Ethanol and pentobarbital inhibition of intrasynaptosomal sequestration of 
calcium.

Harris RA.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(81)90520-7
PMID: 7317104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Postsynaptic endocannabinoid release is critical to long-term depression in the striatum 1. Nat Neurosci. 2002 May;5(5):446-51. doi: 10.1038/nn832.

Postsynaptic endocannabinoid release is critical to long-term depression in the 
striatum.

Gerdeman GL(1)
 Ronesi J, Lovinger DM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Physiology & Biophysics, Vanderbilt University, 
Nashville, Tennessee 37232-0615, USA.
The striatum functions critically in movement control and habit formation.
The 
development and function of cortical input to the striatum are thought to be 
regulated by activity-dependent plasticity of corticostriatal glutamatergic 
synapses.
Here we show that the induction of a form of striatal synaptic 
plasticity, long-term depression (LTD), is dependent on activation of the CB1 
cannabinoid receptor.
LTD was facilitated by blocking cellular endocannabinoid 
uptake, and postsynaptic loading of anandamide (AEA) produced presynaptic 
depression.
The endocannabinoid necessary for striatal LTD is thus likely to be 
released postsynaptically as a retrograde messenger.
These findings demonstrate 
a new role for endocannabinoids in the induction of long-term synaptic 
plasticity in a circuit necessary for habit formation and motor control.
DOI: 10.1038/nn832
PMID: 11976704 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Increased levels of NMDA receptor NR2A subunits at pre‐ and postsynaptic sites of the hippocampal CA1: An early response to conditional double knockout of presenilin 1 and 2 <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Greater than 90% of familial Alzheimer's disease (AD) is linked to mutations of presenilin (PS)
 and the loss of PS function altogether within mouse brains by conditional double knockout of the PS 1 and 2 genes (PS‐cDKO) leads to age‐dependent emergence of AD phenotypes, including neurodegeneration and reduced synaptic plasticity in the hippocampal CA1.
The goal of our study was to identify the ultrastructural and molecular changes at synapses in the hippocampal CA1 of this PS‐cDKO mouse model of AD.
We examined the asymmetric (excitatory) synapses formed on apical dendrites of CA1 pyramidal neurons at 2 months postnatal, an age when AD‐like symptoms emerge but brain morphology, as assessed by light microscopy, is still normal.
Our quantitative electron microscopic analyses confirm that PS‐cDKO hippocampi at 2 months postnatal do not yet exhibit synapse losses or spine size alterations.
However, immunocytochemistry reveals that the same region exhibits a 28% increase in the proportion of spines labeled for the NR2A subunits of NMDA receptors (NMDAR), with a 31% increase specifically at postsynaptic densities and a concomitant reduction of these subunits at nonsynaptic sites within spine heads.
In contrast, no change in levels or the distribution pattern of NR2B subunit levels were detected within spine heads.
Presynaptically, NR2A levels are elevated at axo‐spinous junctions and these may contribute to the timing‐dependent, long‐term depression.
These observations point to an early‐onset trapping of NMDAR at synapses that are subtle but may underlie the reduced synaptic plasticity at 2 months of age and excitotoxicity at later stages.
J. Comp.
Neurol.
517:512–523, 2009.
© 2009 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
Search for biological correlates of depression and mechanisms of action of antidepressant treatment modalities. Do neuropeptides play a role? 1. Physiol Behav. 2007 Sep 10;92(1-2):226-31. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.05.016.
 Epub 2007 May 21.

Search for biological correlates of depression and mechanisms of action of 
antidepressant treatment modalities. Do neuropeptides play a role?

Mathé AA(1)
 Husum H, El Khoury A, Jiménez-Vasquez P, Gruber SH, Wörtwein G, 
Nikisch G, Baumann P, Agren H, Andersson W, Södergren A, Angelucci F.

Author information:
(1)Karolinska Institutet, Department of Clinical Neuroscience, Karolinska 
University Hospital Huddinge, Psychiatry M56, E-141 86 Stockholm, Sweden.
aleksander.mathe@ki.se

Dysregulation of the monoaminergic systems is likely a sufficient but not a 
necessary cause of depression.
A wealth of data indicates that neuropeptides, 
e.g., NPY, CRH, somatostatin, tachykinins and CGRP play a role in affective 
disorders and alcohol use/abuse.
This paper focuses on NPY in etiology and 
pathophysiology of depression.
Decreased peptide and mRNA NPY were found in 
hippocampus of both the genetic, e.g., the FSL strain, and environmental rat 
models of depression, e.g., chronic mild stress and early life maternal 
separation paradigms.
Rat models of alcoholism also show altered NPY.
Furthermore, NPY is also reduced in CSF of depressed patients.
Antidepressive 
treatments tested so far (lithium, topiramate, SSRIs, ECT and ECS, wheel 
running) increase NPY selectively in rat hippocampus and in human CSF.
Moreover, 
NPY given icv to rat has antidepressive effects which are antagonized by NPY-Y1 
blockers.
The data support our hypothesis that the NPY system dysregulation 
constitutes one of the biological underpinnings of depression and that one 
common mechanism of action of antidepressive treatment modalities may be effects 
on NPY and its receptors.
In a novel paradigm, early life maternal separation 
was superimposed on "depressed" FSL and control rats and behavioral and brain 
neurochemistry changes observed in adulthood.
The consequences were more 
deleterious in genetically vulnerable FSL.
Early antidepressive treatment 
modulated the adult sequelae.
Consequently, if these data are confirmed, the 
ethical and medical question that will be asked is whether it is permissible and 
advisable to consider prophylactically treating persons at risk.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2007.05.016
PMID: 17572454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Impairment of learning or memory in the mature and old rat by diazepam 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1981;73(3):304-5. doi: 10.1007/BF00422422.

Impairment of learning or memory in the mature and old rat by diazepam.

Komiskey HL
 Cook TM, Lin CF, Hayton WL.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00422422
PMID: 6787652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Changes in the mechanogram and other circulatory parameters induced by isoprenaline and adrenaline under the effect of verapamil
 quinidine and adrenergic substances].
1.
Arzneimittelforschung.
1970 Apr;20(4):501-9.
[Changes in the mechanogram and other circulatory parameters induced by 
isoprenaline and adrenaline under the effect of verapamil, quinidine and 
adrenergic substances].
[Article in German]

Haas H.

PMID: 5467814 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Potentiation by β‐Adrenoceptor Blocking Agents of the Inhibitory Effect of Adrenaline on Carrageenin‐Induced Rat Paw Oedema <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> The β‐adrenoceptor blocking agents (±)‐practolol
 (±)‐propranolol, (—)‐propranolol and (±)‐sotalol were found to <jats:italic>reduce</jats:italic> the adrenaline induced inhibition of carrageenin‐induced rat paw oedema during the first hour of development and then <jats:italic>potentiate</jats:italic> adrenaline for at least 3 hours.
Experiments carried out with (+)‐propranolol indicated that both effects depended on the levoisomers of the substances and accordingly on some kind of β‐blockade.
It has previously been suggested that normal stores of endogenous catecholamines might be essential for the development of carrageenin‐induced rat paw oedema (ARNTZEN &amp; BRISEID 1973).
Under the experimental conditions used in the present work (—)‐propranolol did not counteract the increase in the catecholamine content of the spleen caused by adrenaline injection, more than (+)‐propranolol.
It is suggested that the marked potentiation of the oedema inhibition caused by adrenaline might be due to a combined effect of increased adrenaline stores and β‐adrenoceptor blockade.</jats:p>
Effect of diethylstilbestrol on skin sterols of the male rat 1. J Lipid Res. 1968 Nov;9(6):773-81.

Effect of diethylstilbestrol on skin sterols of the male rat.

Horlick L.

Diethylstilbestrol (DES) was injected in doses ranging from 600 micro g to 0.4 
micrograms/kg body weight into mature male rats over a 3 wk period. Profound 
effects on skin morphology and on sterol content of skin were noted. The 
sebaceous glands atrophied and the epidermis lost granularity. The 
concentrations of all skin sterols
 with the exception of cholesterol, were 
reduced.
At a dose level of DES of 4 micrograms/kg there was still a perceptible 
reduction in the concentration of Delta(7)-cholestenol.
Incubation of skin 
fragments with acetate-2-(14)C for 2 hr demonstrated a reduced uptake of (14)C 
into the nonsaponifiable fraction of skin lipids at all dose levels studied.
Preliminary thin-layer chromatography of the nonsaponifiable fraction revealed 
that the uptake of (14)C into cholesterol was only slightly decreased; uptake 
into cholesterol precursors was decreased somewhat more.
The epidermis and 
dermis were separated by incubation of skin with elastase and hyaluronidase.
The 
epidermis contained at least three times as much sterol per mg dry weight as did 
the dermis.
Unesterified cholesterol was the major sterol present in both 
layers; the other sterols were present mainly as esters.
DES injection resulted 
in no change in the free sterol content but markedly reduced the ester content 
of the epidermis and dermis.
PMID: 5685269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Vestibular nerve activation of a brain stem cholinergic system influencing the spinal cord 1. Neuropharmacology. 1971 Jul;10(4):425-36. doi: 10.1016/0028-3908(71)90070-0.

Vestibular nerve activation of a brain stem cholinergic system influencing the 
spinal cord.

Barnes CD
 Pompeiano O.

DOI: 10.1016/0028-3908(71)90070-0
PMID: 5094309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Crystal structure of the disulfide-stabilized Fv fragment of anticancer antibody B1: Conformational influence of an engineered disulfide bond 1. Proteins. 1998 May 1;31(2):128-38.

Crystal structure of the disulfide-stabilized Fv fragment of anticancer antibody 
B1: conformational influence of an engineered disulfide bond.

Almog O(1)
 Benhar I, Vasmatzis G, Tordova M, Lee B, Pastan I, Gilliland GL.
Author information:
(1)Center for Advanced Research in Biotechnology, University of Maryland 
Biotechnology Institute and the National Institute of Standards and Technology, 
Rockville, Maryland 20850, USA.
A recombinant Fv construct of the B1 monoclonal antibody that recognizes the 
LewisY-related carbohydrate epitope on human carcinoma cells has been prepared.
The Fv is composed of the polypeptide chains of the VH and VL domains expressed 
independently and isolated as inclusion bodies.
The Fv is prepared by combining 
and refolding equimolar amounts of guanidine chloride solubilized inclusion 
bodies.
The Fv is stabilized by an engineered interchain disulfide bridge 
between residues VL100 and VH44.
This construct has a similar binding affinity 
as that of the single-chain construct (Benhar and Pastan, Clin.
Cancer Res.
1:1023-1029, 1995).
The B1 disulfide-stabilized Fv (BldsFv) crystallizes in 
space group P6(1)22 with the unit cell parameters a = b = 80.1 A, and c = 138.1 
A.
The crystal structure of the BldsFv has been determined at 2.1-A resolution 
using the molecular replacement technique.
The final structure has a 
crystallographic R-value of 0.187 with a root mean square deviation in bond 
distance of 0.014 A and in bond angle of 2.74 degrees.
Comparisons of the BldsFv 
structure with known structures of Fv regions of other immunoglobulin fragments 
shows closely related secondary and tertiary structures.
The antigen combining 
site of BldsFv is a deep depression 10-A wide and 17-A long with the walls of 
the depression composed of residues, many of which are tyrosines, from 
complementarity determining regions L1, L3, H1, H2, and H3.
Model building 
studies indicate that the LewisY tetrasaccharide, Fuc-Gal-Nag-Fuc, can be 
accommodated in the antigen combining site in a manner consistent with the 
epitope predicted in earlier biochemical studies (Pastan, Lovelace, Gallo, 
Rutherford, Magnani, and Willingham, Cancer Res.
51:3781-3787, 1991).
Thus, the 
engineered disulfide bridge appears to cause little, if any, distortion in the 
Fv structure, making it an effective substitute for the B1 Fab.
PMID: 9593187 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Protective effects of triterpenoids on primarily cultured rat hepatocytes injured by D-galactosamine and carbon tetrachloride]. 1. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2007 May;36(3):247-54. doi: 
10.3785/j.issn.1008-9292.2007.03.007.

[Protective effects of triterpenoids on primarily cultured rat hepatocytes 
injured by D-galactosamine and carbon tetrachloride].

[Article in Chinese]

Ma KF(1)
 Zhang XY, Qi LY.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology & Toxicology and Biochemical Pharmaceutics, College 
of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310058, China.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the protective effects and mechanism of triterpenoids 
on primarily cultured rat hepatocytes injured by D-galactosamine (D-GalN) or 
carbon tetrachloride (CCl4).
METHODS: Rat hepatocytes were isolated by two-step collagenase perfusion and 
cultured in RPMI 1640 medium.
Protective effects of asiatic acid (AA) and 
beta-glycyrrhetinic acid (GA) were evaluated on hepatocytes injured by D-GalN (2 
mmol/L) or CCl4 (10 mmol/L).
Cell morphology was observed by light microscope, 
cell viability was measured by MTT assay, AST and LDH were determined by an 
automatic analyzer.
Fluorescence assay was applied to test reactive oxygen 
species (ROS), nitric oxide end products (NOx) and reduced glutathione (GSH), 
and JC-1 staining was used to determine mitochondria membrane potential 
(DeltaPsim).
RESULTS: AST and LDH in medium were decreased when treated with AA and GA after 
D-GalN injury (P<0.05), furthermore AA enhanced the hepatocyte viability 
(P<0.05).
Moreover, AA and GA significantly reduced ROS and NOx generation, and 
ameliorated DeltaPsim lost induced by D-GalN.
AA also inhibited GSH decrease due 
to D-GalN and CCl4 treatment.
CONCLUSION: Both AA and GA could protect hepatocytes from D-GalN and CCl4 
injuries, which is associated with reducing intracellular ROS and NOx, reversing 
GSH depression and ameliorating DeltaPsim lost.
DOI: 10.3785/j.issn.1008-9292.2007.03.007
PMID: 17571307 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Neuropeptide <scp>Y</scp>‐immunoreactive Neurons in the Cerebral Cortex of Humans and Other Haplorrhine Primates <jats:p>We examined the distribution of neurons immunoreactive for neuropeptide <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">Y</jats:styled-content> (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content>) in the posterior part of the superior temporal cortex (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">B</jats:styled-content>rodmann's area 22 or area <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>pt) of humans and nonhuman haplorrhine primates. <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content> has been implicated in learning and memory and the density of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content>‐expressing cortical neurons and axons is reduced in depression
 bipolar disorder, schizophrenia, and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">A</jats:styled-content>lzheimer's disease.
Due to the role that <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content> plays in both cognition and neurodegenerative diseases, we tested the hypothesis that the density of cortical and interstitial neurons expressing <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content> was increased in humans relative to other primate species.
The study sample included great apes (chimpanzee and gorilla), <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">O</jats:styled-content>ld <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">W</jats:styled-content>orld monkeys (pigtailed macaque, moor macaque, and baboon) and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">N</jats:styled-content>ew <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">W</jats:styled-content>orld monkeys (squirrel monkey and capuchin).
Stereologic methods were used to estimate the density of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content>‐immunoreactive (‐ir) neurons in layers <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">I</jats:styled-content>‐<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">VI</jats:styled-content> of area <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>pt and the subjacent white matter.
Adjacent <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">N</jats:styled-content>issl‐stained sections were used to calculate local densities of all neurons.
The ratio of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content>‐ir neurons to total neurons within area <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>pt and the total density of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content>‐ir neurons within the white matter were compared among species.
Overall, <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content>‐ir neurons represented only an average of 0.006% of the total neuron population.
While there were significant differences among species, phylogenetic trends in <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">NPY</jats:styled-content>‐ir neuron distributions were not observed and humans did not differ from other primates.
However, variation among species warrants further investigation into the distribution of this neuromodulator system.
Am.
J. Primatol.
75:415‐424, 2013.
© 2012 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.</jats:p>
Enhanced growth hormone response to clonidine after repeated electroconvulsive shock in a primate species 1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 1981;6(1):77-9. doi: 10.1016/0306-4530(81)90050-0.

Enhanced growth hormone response to clonidine after repeated electroconvulsive 
shock in a primate species.

McWilliam JR
 Meldrum BS, Checkley SA.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-4530(81)90050-0
PMID: 7244057 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reduced synthesis of 5-aminolevulinate dehydratase in styrene-treated rats 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1986 Jun 20;867(3):89-96. doi: 
10.1016/0167-4781(86)90068-0.

Reduced synthesis of 5-aminolevulinate dehydratase in styrene-treated rats.

Fujita H
 Koizumi A, Hayashi N, Ikeda M.

5-Aminolevulinate dehydratase (porphobilinogen synthase; 5-aminolevulinate 
hydro-lyase, EC 4.2.1.24) preparations purified from rat liver and erythrocytes 
are indistinguishable in terms of molecular weight, subunit size, 
immunoreactivity, amino-acid composition and kinetic properties, suggesting that 
the enzyme from liver and erythrocytes are identical.
Intraperitoneal injection 
of styrene to rats decreased 5-aminolevulinate dehydratase activity in both 
erythrocyte (to 8% of the control) and the liver (to 40% of the control).
Studies utilizing polysome-directed cell-free translation indicated that hepatic 
synthesis of the enzyme was inhibited by styrene at the transcriptional level.
In vitro addition of styrene 7,8-oxide, a major intermediate of styrene, to 
purified 5-aminolevulinate dehydratase resulted in a loss of immunoassayable 
enzyme protein to less than 1% of the untreated control.
These findings suggest 
that the decrease in 5-aminolevulinate dehydratase caused by in vivo treatment 
of styrene is partially due to a transcription-dependent decrease in the enzyme 
synthesis, and partially to post-translational alteration of the structure of 
the enzyme protein.
DOI: 10.1016/0167-4781(86)90068-0
PMID: 3718991 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic administration of desipramine and imipramine but not zimelidine attenuates clonidine-induced depression of avoidance behavior in rats. 1. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm. 1988 Jul-Aug;40(4):341-9.

Chronic administration of desipramine and imipramine but not zimelidine 
attenuates clonidine-induced depression of avoidance behavior in rats.

Kostowski W(1)
 Obersztyn M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Physiology of the Nervous System, Institute of 
Psychiatry and Neurology, Warszawa, Poland.
Clonidine (CLO) given intraperitoneally in a dose of 0.05 mg/kg decreased the 
open-field behavior in rats and completely abolished avoidance acquisition.
Short term (4 days) administration of desipramine (DMI) and imipramine (IMI) 
practically failed to change the depressive effects of CLO whilst chronic (21 
days) treatment significantly reduced the CLO action on both avoidance and 
open-field behavior.
Contrary to tricyclic antidepressants, zimelidine (ZIM) 
given either acutely or chronically did not affect the avoidance deficit but 
given chronically attenuated the CLO-induced sedation in the open field.
The 
results suggest that "classic" tricyclic antidepressants acting strongly upon 
noradrenaline uptake are more potent in preventing avoidance deficit induced by 
the alpha 2-adrenoceptor agonist, CLO than drugs acting more selectively upon 
serotonin uptake.
PMID: 2851779 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The endocellular distribution and the enzymatic oxidation and reduction of the liposoluble neutral fractions (LNF) acting on the blood pressure. 1. Enzymologia. 1970 Mar 31;38(3):189-99.

The endocellular distribution and the enzymatic oxidation and reduction of the 
liposoluble neutral fractions (LNF) acting on the blood pressure.

Martini E
 Chiesa F, Oberosler R, Seren E, Beghelli V.

PMID: 4191100 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of repetitive activation on the afterhyperpolarization in dorsal spinocerebellar tract neurones. <jats:p>1. The changes in the afterhyperpolarization (a.h.p.) with repetitive activation have been studied in dorsal spinocerebellar tract cells of the cat using intracellular recording techniques. 2. The a.h.p. following a single spike was conditioned at different interspike intervals by a single preceding spike. In the majority of neurones the a.h.p. following a spike added approximately linearly with that generated by a preceding spike. 3. In other cells the a.h.p. following a spike was instead depressed by a preceding spike. THis depression was approximately constant at interspike intervals less than the a.h.p. duration (50‐100 msec). Thereafter the a.h.p. slowly recovered during the next 100‐300 msec. There was no associated decrease in the initial brief hyperpolarizing undershoot. 4. With shortlasting repetitive activation at high frequency (greater than 100 impulses/sec) the a.h.p
 peak amplitude increased progressively with successive spikes (5‐15 spikes).
No change in the time constant of decay was observed.
A good correspondence was found between the observed increase in peak amplitude of the a.h.p.s and that given by a theoretical linear superposition of the successive a.h.p.s.
5.
Changes in the brief hyperpolarizing undershoot with repetitive activation is also described.</jats:p>
Cadmium treatment and lead‐induced suppression of splenic erythropoiesis 1. J Toxicol Environ Health. 1992 Jan;35(1):1-6. doi: 10.1080/15287399209531588.

Cadmium treatment and lead-induced suppression of splenic erythropoiesis.

Hogan GR(1).

Author information:
(1)College of Science and Technology
 St.
Cloud State University, Minnesota 
56301-4498.
Young adult female mice were injected with lead acetate (d 0).
Following 
injection, determinations were made of the percentages of radioactive iron 
(59Fe) uptake into the hemoglobin of erythrocytes produced by spleen.
Control 
59Fe uptake percentage vacillated between 4.2 and 5.5 within the 7-d period of 
observation.
On d 4 following lead treatment, splenic percentages were 
dramatically reduced below those of the saline-injected controls; by d 6 the 
splenic 59Fe uptake of lead-treated mice was comparable to that of controls.
For 
rodents injected with cadmium chloride on 0, the 59Fe uptake values showed a 
statistically significant elevation by d 2, which was extended beyond that of 
the controls' d 4 value.
For those animals receiving both lead and cadmium (d 
0), the uptake percentages paralleled those of the controls throughout the 7-d 
period of observation.
These data suggest that the inhibitory effect of lead on 
erythropoiesis of the spleen is blocked by a concurrent cadmium treatment.
Results are interpreted in regard to a possible vulnerable target and 
competition for the target by lead and cadmium.
DOI: 10.1080/15287399209531588
PMID: 1728662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enflurane
 Halothane, and Isoflurane Inhibit Removal of 5-Hydroxytryptamine from the Pulmonary Circulation 1.
Anesth Analg.
1982 Aug;61(8):671-5.
Enflurane, halothane, and isoflurane inhibit removal of 5-hydroxytryptamine from 
the pulmonary circulation.
Cook DR, Brandom BW.
We were interested in determining the effect of enflurane, halothane, and 
isoflurane on the uptake and removal of 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) and 
phenylethylamine (PEA) from the lung.
Isolated rabbit lungs were perfused in a 
recirculating system in vitro with 0.1 microM [14C]5-HT or 0.1 microM [14C]PEA 
in Krebs-Ringer solution.
The rate of removal and percentage of removal of the 
bioamines were determined before and after either 1, 2, or 4 MAC multiples of 
the potent anesthetics.
Because of variation in removal of bioamines among lungs 
from different animals, the effects of anesthetics on bioamine removal were 
determined by calculating the percentage of inhibition of removal using data 
from the control and test period for each lung.
At 2 MAC concentrations, the 
anesthetics inhibited 5-HT removal 11.1%, at 4 MAC concentrations the 
anesthetics inhibited 5-HT removal 29.8% and significantly prolonged the 
half-life (t 1/2) of 5-HT removal.
There was significant (10.8%) inhibition of 
PEA removal at 4 MAC concentrations for the three anesthetics.
As uptake of 5-HT 
is the rate-limiting step in 5-HT removal, these data demonstrate a uniform 
depression of 5-HT uptake by the three potent anesthetics.
The rate-limiting 
step of PEA uptake, metabolism by monoamine oxidases, is inhibited at 4 MAC 
concentrations of anesthetics.
PMID: 7201270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Clemastine Enhances Myelination in the Prefrontal Cortex and Rescues Behavioral Changes in Socially Isolated Mice <jats:p>Altered myelin structure and oligodendrocyte function have been shown to correlate with cognitive and motor dysfunction and deficits in social behavior. We and others have previously demonstrated that social isolation in mice induced behavioral
 transcriptional, and ultrastructural changes in oligodendrocytes of the prefrontal cortex (PFC).
However, whether enhancing myelination and oligodendrocyte differentiation could be beneficial in reversing such changes remains unexplored.
To test this hypothesis, we orally administered clemastine, an antimuscarinic compound that has been shown to enhance oligodendrocyte differentiation and myelination<jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic>, for 2 weeks in adult mice following social isolation.
Clemastine successfully reversed social avoidance behavior in mice undergoing prolonged social isolation.
Impaired myelination was rescued by oral clemastine treatment, and was associated with enhanced oligodendrocyte progenitor differentiation and epigenetic changes.
Clemastine induced higher levels of repressive histone methylation (H3K9me3), a marker for heterochromatin, in oligodendrocytes, but not neurons, of the PFC.
This was consistent with the capability of clemastine in elevating H3K9 histone methyltransferases activity in cultured primary mouse oligodendrocytes, an effect that could be antagonized by cotreatment with muscarine.
Our data suggest that promoting adult myelination is a potential strategy for reversing depressive-like social behavior.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT</jats:bold>Oligodendrocyte development and myelination are highly dynamic processes influenced by experience and neuronal activity.
However, whether enhancing myelination and oligodendrocyte differentiation is beneficial to treat depressive-like behavior has been unexplored.
Mice undergoing prolonged social isolation display impaired myelination in the prefrontal cortex.
Clemastine, a Food and Drug Administration-approved antimuscarinic compound that has been shown to enhance myelination under demyelinating conditions, successfully reversed social avoidance behavior in adult socially isolated mice.
This was associated with enhanced myelination and oligodendrocyte differentiation in the prefrontal cortex through epigenetic regulation.
Thus, enhancing myelination may be a potential means of reversing depressive-like social behavior.</jats:p>
Anesthetic Potencies and the Unitary Theory of Narcosis 1. Anesth Analg. 1981 Jun;60(6):380-4.

Anesthetic potencies and the unitary theory of narcosis.

Deady JE
 Koblin DD, Eger EI 2nd, Heavner JE, D'Aoust B.

Anesthetic potencies of nitrous oxide, isoflurane, enflurane, halothane, 
cyclopropane, or chloroform were measured in male (CD-1) mice using three end 
points: (a) the ability to maintain an upright position (the righting-response 
ED50, RR ED50); (b) the response to a tail-clamp stimulus (MAC); and (c) the 
response to heat applied to the tail (tail-flick ED50, TF ED50).
The ratio of RR 
ED50 to MAC ranged from mean values of 0.475 for isoflurane, 0.507 for 
cyclopropane, 0.524 for enflurane, and less than 0.55 for N2O, to 0.600 for 
halothane and 0.621 for chloroform.
The ratios of RR EDS50 to MAC for halothane 
differed significantly from the ratios for isoflurane and enflurane.
The mean 
values for TF ED50/MAC and RR ED50/TG ED50 ranged from 0.688 to 1.01 and 0.664 
to 0.682, respectively, for isoflurane, enflurane, and halothane.
The nitrous 
oxide RR ED50/TF ED50, however, was 1.34.
The ratios of TF ED50 to MAC were 
significantly different for halothane and isoflurane.
The different end points 
were measured in an attempt to determine whether the response in mice 
anesthetized with a particular agent was the same with varying stimuli.
The 
differences found suggest that a unitary mechanism of anesthetic action cannot 
completely explain the depression defined by these three end points.
PMID: 7195159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Metabolic effects of phenethyl alcohol on mammalian cells 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1967 Dec 19;149(2):513-8. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2787(67)90179-7.

Metabolic effects of phenethyl alcohol on mammalian cells.

Rosenkranz HS
 Mednis A, Marks PA, Rose HM.
DOI: 10.1016/0005-2787(67)90179-7
PMID: 6081518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mutagenesis and Molecular Modeling of the Orthosteric Binding Site of the mGlu2 Receptor Determining Interactions of the Group II Receptor Antagonist <sup>3</sup>H‐HYDIA <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p><jats:bold>Binding of the mGlu2/3 antagonist</jats:bold> HYDIA in the closed conformation model of mGlu2 causes repulsive interactions with Y216 in lobe II of the binding pocket
 preventing closure of the VFT.<jats:boxed-text content-type="graphic" position="anchor"><jats:graphic xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" mimetype="image/gif" position="anchor" specific-use="enlarged-web-image" xlink:href="graphic/mcontent.gif"><jats:alt-text>magnified image</jats:alt-text></jats:graphic></jats:boxed-text></jats:p><jats:p><jats:italic>Modulation of metabotropic glutamate 2/3 receptors represents a promising target for the treatment of neuropsychiatric disorders such as schizophrenia and depression.
The novel mGlu2/3 ligand HYDIA ((1</jats:italic>S<jats:italic>,2</jats:italic>R<jats:italic>,3</jats:italic>R<jats:italic>,5</jats:italic>R<jats:italic>,6</jats:italic>S<jats:italic>)‐2‐amino‐3‐hydroxy‐bicyclo[3.1.0]hexane‐2,6‐dicarboxylic acid) is a conformationally restricted and hydroxylated glutamate analogue.
HYDIA is a potent and selective competitive antagonist of <jats:sc>L</jats:sc>‐glutamate at the mGlu2/3 receptors in spite of being structurally very similar to the bicyclic LY354740, which is a potent and selective mGlu2/3 agonist.
By comparing these two ligands, this study delineate the interaction mode of <jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H‐HYDIA at the mGlu2 receptor, using both mutagenesis studies and computational modeling.
Binding of HYDIA in the closed conformation model of mGlu2 results in repulsive interaction with the Y216 residue, preventing closure of the binding pocket and thus receptor activation.
Consequently, HYDIA is proposed to bind in an open conformation model of mGlu2.
Mutation of the structurally important Y216 residue in the binding site caused complete loss of affinity of both <jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H‐LY354740 and <jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H‐HYDIA.
T168 in lobe I was shown to have an important role in HYDIA binding, and in the open conformation model this residue is interacting with the amino group of HYDIA.
The Y144 residue in lobe I is shown to be engaged in both receptor interlobe binding and ligand interaction.
Receptor mutations at this position (Y144G, Y144S and Y144A) showed dramatic impact on binding affinity and functional effect of HYDIA.
The mGlu2 receptor mutants with increased structural flexibility at this position, which is crucial for pocket closure, were clearly preferred.
These studies highlight the unique properties of the novel <jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H‐HYDIA ligand and provide further support to our understanding of binding and signal transduction mechanisms of the mGlu2 receptor.</jats:italic></jats:p>
Characterization of Endothelin Receptors in the Cerebral Vasculature and Their Lack of Effect on Spreading Depression <jats:p> The changes in cerebral blood flow that accompany spreading depression are well-described
 as are parallel changes in cellular activity, with a wave of hyperemia followed by a prolonged oligemic phase.
In this study, a cat model of the CBF changes associated with spreading depression and in vitro pharmacology were used to determine if there is a role for the powerful peptide vasoconstrictor endothelin in this response.
For the pharmacological studies, the middle cerebral artery was harvested from cats postmortem.
For the physiological studies, cats were anesthetized with halothane induction and α-chloralose (60 mg/kg, intraperitoneal loading; 20 mg/kg i.v.
2-h maintenance).
CBF was monitored continuously in the parietal cortex using laser Doppler flowmetry (CBF<jats:sub>LDF</jats:sub>) after exposure of the dura mater.
The in vitro work demonstrated that endothelin-1 (ET-1) mediates a strong and potent contraction of cerebral vessels.
Both the selective ET<jats:sub>A</jats:sub> receptor antagonist FR139317 and the combined ET<jats:sub>A</jats:sub> and ET<jats:sub>B</jats:sub> receptor antagonist Bosentan caused a rightward shift of the concentration-response curve without attenuation of the maximum effect.
The calculated pA<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> values were 6.28 and 6.90, respectively.
The slope did not differ from unity, suggesting that the ET-1-mediated contraction is evoked by a single population of ET<jats:sub>A</jats:sub> receptors, which were effectively antagonized by these compounds.
Spreading depression was induced with a needle stick injury to the cortex.
Local administration of the endothelin antagonists FR139317 (10 μ M) and Bosentan (10 μ M) did not affect resting blood flow in the cortex.
Induction of spreading depression following local administration of FR139317 and Bosentan resulted in responses no different from those in control cortex.
These data demonstrate that endothelin does not play a significant role in the vasoconstrictor portion of the CBF change seen in spreading depression, nor does it affect resting flow.
Since it is widely held that spreading depression, or a very similar mechanism, underlies the aura phase of migraine, it may be suggested from these studies that endothelin antagonists are unlikely to be useful in migraine.
</jats:p>
Interactions of guanethidine and indirect-acting sympathomimetic amines. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1972 Feb;195(2):309-14.

Interactions of guanethidine and indirect-acting sympathomimetic amines.

Starke K.

PMID: 5015937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pre‐treatment of bupivacaine‐induced cardiovascular depression using different lipid formulations of propofol <jats:sec><jats:title>Background</jats:title><jats:p>Pre‐treatment with lipid emulsions has been shown to increase lethal doses of bupivacaine
 and the lipid content of propofol may alleviate bupivacaine‐induced cardiotoxicity.
The aim of this study is to investigate the effects of propofol in intralipid or medialipid emulsions on bupivacaine‐induced cardiotoxicity.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Methods</jats:title><jats:p>Rats were anaesthetised with ketamine and were given 0.5 mg/kg/min propofol in intralipid (Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content>), propofol in medialipid (Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">L</jats:styled-content>), or saline (Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>) over 20 min.
Thereafter, 2 mg/kg/min bupivacaine 0.5% was infused.
We recorded time to first dysrhythmia occurrence, respective times to 25% and 50% reduction of the heart rate (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">HR</jats:styled-content>) and mean arterial pressure, and time to asystole and total amount of bupivacaine consumption.
Blood and tissue samples were collected following asystole.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p>The time to first dysrhythmia occurrence, time to 25% and 50% reductions in <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">HR</jats:styled-content>, and time to asystole were longer in Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content> than the other groups.
The cumulative bupivacaine dose given at those time points was higher in Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content>.
Plasma bupivacaine levels were significantly lower in Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content> than in Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>.
Bupivacaine levels in the brain and heart were significantly lower in Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content> and Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">L</jats:styled-content> than in Group <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">C</jats:styled-content>.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusion</jats:title><jats:p>We conclude that pre‐treatment with propofol in intralipid, compared with propofol in medialipid or saline, delayed the onset of bupivacaine‐induced cardiotoxic effects as well as reduced plasma bupivacaine levels.
Further studies are needed to explore tissue bupivacaine levels of propofol in medialipid and adapt these results to clinical practice.</jats:p></jats:sec>
The Mediterranean diet: culture
 health and science 1.
Br J Nutr.
2015 Apr;113 Suppl 2:S1-3.
doi: 10.1017/S0007114515001087.
The Mediterranean diet: culture, health and science.
Donini LM(1), Serra-Majem L(2), Bulló M(3), Gil Á(4), Salas-Salvadó J(3).
Author information:
(1)Food Science and Human Nutrition Research Unit, Medical Pathophysiology, Food 
Science and Endocrinology Section, Department of Experimental Medicine, Sapienza 
University of Rome,Rome,Italy.
(2)Research Institute of Biomedical and Health Sciences, University of Las 
Palmas de Gran Canaria,Las Palmas,Spain.
(3)CIBER Obn Physiopathology of Obesity and Nutrition, Institute of Health 
"Carlos III",Madrid,Spain.
(4)Institute of Nutrition and Food Technology, Centre of Biomedical Research, 
University of Granada,Granada,Spain.
DOI: 10.1017/S0007114515001087
PMID: 26148911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Work in progress correlation of renal medullary prostaglandin content and renal interstitial cell lipid droplets 1. Prostaglandins. 1974 Jun 10;6(5):375-9. doi: 10.1016/0090-6980(74)90010-0.

Correlation of renal medullary prostaglandin content and renal interstitial cell 
lipid droplets.

Comai K
 Prose P, Farber SJ, Paulsrud JR.

DOI: 10.1016/0090-6980(74)90010-0
PMID: 4851198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In vivo and in vitro imaging of I<sub>2</sub> imidazoline receptors in the monkey brain <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> imidazoline receptors (I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>Rs) are associated with depression
 Alzheimer's disease, and Huntington's disease.
However, in vivo imaging of I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>Rs in the monkey brain has not been reported until now.
We performed in vitro and in vivo imaging of (I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>Rs) in the monkey brain using <jats:sup>11</jats:sup>C‐labeled 2‐(3‐fluoro‐4‐tolyl)‐4,5‐dihydro‐1<jats:italic>H</jats:italic>‐imidazole ([<jats:sup>11</jats:sup>C]FTIMD) which has high and selective affinity of I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>Rs.
In an auto‐radiography (ARG) study, the distribution pattern of [<jats:sup>11</jats:sup>C]FTIMD in the monkey brain was similar to that of [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]idazoxan binging to I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>Rs in the human brain, which was previously described.
The specific binding of [<jats:sup>11</jats:sup>C]FTIMD accounted for &gt;97% of total binding in brain regions existing I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>Rs.
In positron emission tomography (PET) studies, the radioactivity was accumulated in brain regions existing I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>Rs ligand BU224, the accumulated radioactivity was decreased to approximately 66%–75% of the baseline measurement at 15–45 min after injection of [<jats:sup>11</jats:sup>C]FTIMD.
These results suggest that [<jats:sup>11</jats:sup>C]FTIMD shows the specific‐binging to I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>Rs in the monkey brain as depicted by PET and ARG.
We performed the first in vivo imaging of I<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>Rs using [<jats:sup>11</jats:sup>C]FTIMD in the monkey brain.
Synapse, 2011.
© 2010 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
Relationships between glutamate release
 blood flow and spreading depression: real-time monitoring using an electroenzymatic dialysis electrode 1.
Neurosci Res.
1998 Nov;32(3):201-7. doi: 10.1016/s0168-0102(98)00090-x.
Relationships between glutamate release, blood flow and spreading depression: 
real-time monitoring using an electroenzymatic dialysis electrode.
Iijima T(1), Shimase C, Iwao Y, Sankawa H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, Kyorin University School of Medicine, Mitaka 
City, Tokyo, Japan.
dy8t-iijm@asahi-net.or.jp

Spreading depression (SD) in a flow-restricted area of the brain may be 
prolonged and may become potentially harmful by releasing glutamate.
We induced 
SD in an oligemia model and examined the subsequent glutamate release.
In 18 
anesthetized male Fischer rats, a laser Doppler flowmeter, an electroenzymatic 
electrode for continuous measurement of glutamate, and a calomel electrode for 
measuring DC potential were placed through a cranial window positioned 3 mm away 
from a second window where KCl-soaked cotton was placed to initiate SD.
The left 
carotid artery or both the common carotid arteries were ligated to suppress 
reactive hyperemia of SD.
SD produced an increase in glutamate from 24.8 +/- 
13.8 to 33.5 +/- 25.3 microM (peak value) (P < 0.0001).
After ligation of both 
carotid arteries, the duration of SD increased from 1.5 +/- 0.6 min (before 
ligation) to 6.4 +/- 5.1 min (P < 0.05).
Glutamate reached a peak level of 63.9 
+/- 72.3 microM, then quickly returned to the control value.
However, there was 
no positive correlation between the duration of SD and glutamate concentration.
It is concluded that prolonged SD is not accompanied by a progressive increase 
in glutamate.
Therefore, glutamate release induced by SD may not exert harmful 
effects on neurons.
DOI: 10.1016/s0168-0102(98)00090-x
PMID: 9875562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
1-Palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine improves cognitive decline by enhancing long-term depression 1. Behav Brain Res. 2009 Dec 1;204(1):129-32. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.05.027.
Epub  2009 May 29.

1-Palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine improves cognitive decline by 
enhancing long-term depression.

Yaguchi T(1)
 Nagata T, Nishizaki T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Bioinformation, Department of Physiology, Hyogo College of 
Medicine, 1-1 Mukogawa-cho, Nishinomiya Hyogo 663-8501, Japan.
1-Palmitoyl-2-oleoyl-sn-glycero-3-phosphocholine (POPhtCho) (1 microM) enhanced 
long-term depression (LTD), a synaptic plasticity relevant to learning and 
memory, in the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices, where expression of the 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid (AMPA) receptor 
subunit GluR1 on the plasma membrane was decreased.
In the water maze test, oral 
administration with POPhtCho (5 mg/kg) significantly shortened the prolonged 
retention latency for rats intraperitoneally injected with scopolamine (1 
mg/kg), while the acquisition latency was not affected.
For humans with mild 
cognitive impairment and dementia (average of Mini Mental State Examination 
score, 18), oral intake with POPhtCho (300 mg/day, once after breakfast) 
everyday raised the score to over 20, corresponding to normal cognitive 
functions, throughout 6 months after intake.
The results of the present study, 
thus, indicate that POPhtCho could ameliorate cognitive disorders, possibly by 
enhancing LTD.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.05.027
PMID: 19482045 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A negative inotropic effect of acetylcholine in the presence of several phosphodiesterase inhibitors 1. Experientia. 1981 Jul 15;37(7):755-6. doi: 10.1007/BF01967963.

A negative inotropic effect of acetylcholine in the presence of several 
phosphodiesterase inhibitors.

Nawrath H
 Gruschwitz P, Zong X.
The phosphodiesterase inhibitors papaverine, theophylline and 
3-isobutyl-1-methylxanthine (IBMX) reveal a negative inotropic effect of 
acetylcholine in cat ventricular heart muscle.
This effect in unrelated to 
beta-adrenoceptor stimulation and possibly mediated by the accumulation of 
cyclic GMP.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01967963
PMID: 6168488 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Alteration of humoral antibody production following in vivo administration of phytohemagglutinin 1. Experientia. 1968 Apr 15;24(4):390-1. doi: 10.1007/BF02140838.

Alteration of humoral antibody production following in vivo administration of 
phytohemagglutinin.

St Pierre RL.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02140838
PMID: 4973979 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of interleukin-2 and interleukin-6 on ovary in the ovulatory period--establishment of the new ovarian perfusion system and influence of interleukins on ovulation rate and steroid secretion]. 1. Hokkaido Igaku Zasshi. 1995 Jul;70(4):561-72.

[Effect of interleukin-2 and interleukin-6 on ovary in the ovulatory 
period--establishment of the new ovarian perfusion system and influence of 
interleukins on ovulation rate and steroid secretion].

[Article in Japanese]

Mikuni M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Obstetrics and Gynecology
 Hokkaido University School of 
Medicine, Sapporo, Japan.
Cytokines are not only mediators of inflammation and the immune system but are 
also important factors in cell proliferation, differentiation, and cell-to-cell 
communication.
Cytokines have been identified within follicular fluid and some 
authors indicated that they are playing some roles in ovulation and ovarian 
steroidogenesis.
Interleukin-2 (IL-2), mainly secreted by activated T-cells, 
influences other T-cells, B-cells, Macrophages, NKcells, etc.
and is a major 
proliferating and differentiation factor of lymphocytes.
Interleukin-6 (IL-6) is 
known to be secreted from and influence immune cells and/or non-immune cells 
such as fibroblasts, hepatic cells, endothelial cells, etc.
The in vitro ovarian 
perfusion system has some advantages, compared with in vivo study, that is, it 
is devoid of systemic or unnecessary factors which are not focused on.
In this 
study, the effects of IL-2 and IL-6 on ovulation and steroidogenesis were 
examined using the newly developed in vitro ovarian perfusion system and the 
culture of follicular granulosa cells.
In the perfusion experiment, 100 ng/ml of 
IL-6 suppressed LH (100ng/ml)-induced estradiol (E2) secretion but did not 
influence progesterone (P4) secretion, while IL-2 had no effect on steroid 
secretion.
Both IL-2 (100ng/ml) and IL-6 (100ng/ml) significantly suppressed 
LH-induced ovulation (ovulation rate; 8.3 +/- 1.5, mean +/- SE), to 2.2 +/- 1.1 
and 3.2 +/- 1.0, respectively.
Addition of 1.0, 3.0, 10 ng/ml of IL-6 decreased 
FSH (50ng/ml)-induced E2 secretion dose-dependently in the culture experiments 
of granulosa cells.
IL-6 also suppressed FSH-induced P4 secretion in 
concentrations of 3.0 and 10 ng/ml.
On the other hand, IL-2 concentrations of 10 
and 30 ng/ml increased FSH-induced P4 secretion although 100 ng/ml of IL-2 
showed no effect.
Any dosage of IL-2 did not influence E2 secretion induced by 
FSH.
All of these results obtained in the present study suggest that IL-2 and 
IL-6 may directly and/or indirectly suppress some mechanisms of ovulation, but 
with still unclarified different pathways.
PMID: 7590603 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Comparative gastric antisecretory and antiulcer effects of prostaglandin E1 and its methyl ester in animals 1. Prostaglandins. 1975 Aug;10(2):205-15. doi: 10.1016/0090-6980(75)90040-4.

Comparative gastric antisecretory and antiulcer effects of prostaglandin E1 and 
its methyl ester in animals.

Dajani EZ
 Driskill DR, Bianchi RG, Collins PW.
The influence of methyl esterification of the carboxyl group of PGE1 on the 
gastric antisecretory and antiulcer activities were studied.
The gastric 
antisecretory effects of PGE1 free acid and PGE1 methyl ester (PGE1ME) were 
studied in the Heidenhain pouch dog.
Secretion was stimulated with constant 
intravenous infusion of histamine dihydrochloride.
When a steady-state plateau 
of gastric secretion had been reached, the prostaglandins were administered 
either by a single intravenous bolus (10.0 mug/kg) or by continuous infusion 
(1.0 mug/kg/min).
PGE1ME was found to be slightly more potent and longer-acting 
than PFE1 when administered by a single i.v.
bolus.
PGE1ME was also shown to be 
more potent than PGE1 when infused intravenously for a two-hour period.
PGE1ME 
caused a significant alteration in gastric juice concentration of hydrogen and 
sodium ions in an inverse relationship.
Potassium and chloride concentration 
were not altered from pre-existing steady-state values following administration 
of either form of prostaglandin.
Similarly, PGE1ME was also found to possess 
significantly greater antiulcer activity in the rat forced-exertion ulcer test.
These findings support the hypothesis that methyl esterification of the 
prostaglandin molecule will increase some of the biological actions of PGE1 
through inhibition of metabolic beta-oxidation of the carboxylic side chain.
DOI: 10.1016/0090-6980(75)90040-4
PMID: 1178902 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Contrast Material on Dimensions and Hemodynamics of the Newborn Heart 1. Invest Radiol. 1977 Nov-Dec;12(6):510-4. doi:
10.1097/00004424-197711000-00008.

Effects of contrast material on dimensions and hemodynamics of the newborn 
heart: a study in conscious newborn lambs.

Romero TE
 Higgins CB, Kirkpatrick S, Friedman WF.
Injections of contrast material (Hypaque M-75%) and normal saline into the left 
ventricle (LV) of 1- to 3-month-old conscious lambs, during continuous 
monitoring of LV internal dimensions and pressures, revealed instaneous 
increases in LV end diastolic and end systolic volumes and LV end diastolic 
pressure.
After contrast material, these alterations were sustained.
Contrast 
injections were also accompanied by a mild depression in LV contractile state 
(dp/dt/P), systemic vasodilatation and persistent augmentation of cardiac 
output.
The immediate effects on LV dimensions are primarily a consequence of 
acute volume expansion of the LV by the injection while the sustained changes 
likely reflect an expanded intravascular volume.
DOI: 10.1097/00004424-197711000-00008
PMID: 145418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Evaluation of Potential Antidepressant-Like Activity of Chalcone-1203 in Various Murine Experimental Depressant Models 1. Neurochem Res. 2014 Feb;39(2):313-20. doi: 10.1007/s11064-013-1224-8. Epub
2013  Dec 17.

Evaluation of potential antidepressant-like activity of chalcone-1203 in various 
murine experimental depressant models.

Guan LP(1)
 Tang LM, Pan CY, Zhao SL, Wang SH.
Author information:
(1)Zhejiang Provincial Key Engineering Technology Research Center of Marine 
Biomedical Products, Food and Pharmacy College, Zhejiang Ocean University, 
Zhejiang, 316000, Zhoushan, People's Republic of China, glp730@zjou.edu.cn.
Two classic animal behavior despair tests-the forced swimming test (FST) and the 
tail suspension test (TST) were used to evaluate antidepressant-like activity of 
a new chalcone compound, chalcone-1203 in mice.
It was observed that 
chalcone-1203 at dose of 1, 5, and 10 mg/kg significantly reduced the immobility 
time in the FST and TST in mice 30 min after treatment.
In addition, 
chalcone-1203 was found to exhibit significant oral activity in the FST in mice.
It also produced a reduction in the ambulation in the open-field test in mice 
not previously habituated to the arena, but no effect in the locomotor activity 
in mice previously habituated to the open-field.
The main monoamine 
neurotransmitters and their metabolites in mouse brain regions were also 
simultaneously determined by HPLC-ECD.
It was found that chalcone-1203 
significantly increased the concentrations of the main neurotransmitters 5-HT 
and NE in the hippocampus, hypothalamus and cortex.
Chalcone-1203 also 
significantly reduced the ratio of 5-HIAA/5-HT in the hippocampus and cortex, 
shown down 5-HT metabolism compared with mice treated with stress vehicle.
In 
conclusion, chalcone-1203 produced significant antidepressant-like activity, and 
the mechanism of action may be due to increased 5-HT and NE in the mouse 
hippocampus and cortex.
DOI: 10.1007/s11064-013-1224-8
PMID: 24343532 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mechanism of Intestinal Mucosal Immune Dysfunction Following Trauma–Hemorrhage: Increased Apoptosis Associated with Elevated Fas Expression in Peyer's Patches 1. J Surg Res. 1997 Jun;70(1):55-60. doi: 10.1006/jsre.1997.5111.

Mechanism of intestinal mucosal immune dysfunction following trauma-hemorrhage: 
increased apoptosis associated with elevated Fas expression in Peyer's patches.

Xu YX(1)
 Ayala A, Monfils B, Cioffi WG, Chaudry IH.
Author information:
(1)Center for Surgical Research, Brown University School of Medicine and Rhode 
Island Hospital, Providence 02903, USA.
Although intestinal mucosal immune dysfunction occurs after trauma and 
hemorrhage and appears to contribute to infectious complications, the mechanism 
is not known.
In this regard, the inappropriate induction of immune cell 
apoptosis may contribute to the immune dysfunction following trauma and 
hemorrhage.
To study this, we examined Peyer's patch cells for evidence of 
apoptosis and changes in Fas protein expression, as well as alterations in the 
relative lymphocyte subpopulations after trauma and hemorrhagic shock.
Male 
C3H/HeN mice underwent sham operation, trauma (i.e., laparotomy), hemorrhagic 
shock (mean arterial blood pressure of 35 +/- 5 mmHg for 90 min, followed by 
adequate crystalloid resuscitation), or trauma plus hemorrhage.
Peyer's patch 
cells were isolated at 24 and 72 hr after the procedure.
The percentage of 
apoptotic cells, Fas protein expression, and cell percentage of phenotype were 
determined by flow cytometry.
The results indicate that trauma alone induced no 
significant change in the measured parameters.
However, (i) there were a 
significant decrease in total viable cell yield and an increased apoptosis in 
Peyer's patch cells at 24 and 72 hr following hemorrhage or trauma plus 
hemorrhage; (ii) the increased apoptosis in Peyer's patch was predominantly in 
cells of the B-cell lineage; (iii) the increased apoptosis was associated with 
an elevated Fas expression.
In conclusion, hemorrhage alone or trauma plus 
hemorrhage can induce increased apoptosis in Peyer's patch cells, which is 
associated with the increased Fas expression.
Thus, apoptotic involution may 
play an important role in the depression of intestinal mucosal immune function 
after trauma and hemorrhagic shock.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.1997.5111
PMID: 9228928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Spreading depression induces c-fos-like immunoreactivity and NGF mRNA in the rat cerebral cortex 1. Brain Res. 1993 Jan 29;602(1):99-103. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(93)90247-k.

Spreading depression induces c-fos-like immunoreactivity and NGF mRNA in the rat 
cerebral cortex.

Herrera DG(1)
 Maysinger D, Gadient R, Boeckh C, Otten U, Cuello AC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Therapeutics, McGill University, Montreal, 
Canada.
Application of potassium chloride (KCl) to the brain surface elicits spreading 
depression which leads to a marked induction of the proto-oncogene c-fos in the 
treated cerebral cortex at the earliest time examined (90 min).
High levels of 
c-fos immunoreactivity are observed up to 6 h after KCl treatment.
The areas 
affected include the cingulate, entorhinal and frontoparietal cortex throughout 
the treated hemisphere.
The c-fos expression preceded an increase in both 
NGFmRNA and NGF-like protein(s).
A maximal increase in c-fos was detected within 
3 h, whereas NGFmRNA peaked at 12 h and NGF-like protein(s) reached their 
maximum level 24 h after KCl application.
The most prominent increase in NGFmRNA 
was measured in the entorhinal cortex (50-fold), but other cortical areas also 
showed a moderate increase of 2-3-fold.
In conclusion, our results provide 
evidence that increases in c-fos and NGF expression are early adaptive responses 
following brain injury.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(93)90247-k
PMID: 8448663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Purification and characterization of (Na+ + K+)-ATPase. I. The influence of detergents on the activity of (Na+ + K+)-ATPase in preparations from the outer medulla of rabbit kidney 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1971 Apr 13;233(2):366-80. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2736(71)90334-8.

Purification and characterization of (Na+ + K+)-ATPase. I. The influence of 
detergents on the activity of (Na+ + K+)-ATPase in preparations from the outer 
medulla of rabbit kidney.

Jorgensen PL
 Skou JC.
DOI: 10.1016/0005-2736(71)90334-8
PMID: 4254310 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Responses of rat pallidum cells to cortex stimulation and effects of altered dopaminergic activity 1. Neuroscience. 1985 Jul;15(3):683-94. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(85)90070-3.

Responses of rat pallidum cells to cortex stimulation and effects of altered 
dopaminergic activity.

Toan DL
 Schultz W.

The aim of the study was to investigate the influences of dopamine on 
oligosynaptic corticopallidal neurotransmission.
Different cortical areas were 
electrically stimulated and the responses in the pallidum were recorded by 
single-cell electrophysiology.
Out of 377 pallidal neurons, 192 (51%) responded 
to stimulation of at least one of the cortical areas investigated.
Convergence 
between frontal cortex and at least one of the other cortical areas was seen in 
59 of 110 (54%) pallidal neurons responding to frontal cortex stimulation.
Nearly three-quarters (73%) of all responsive pallidal neurons showed a short 
latency reduction of activity following the stimulus, the rest responded with 
pure activation or an activation-depression sequence.
The dopaminergic 
influences on this corticopallidal impulse transmission were assessed by the 
systemic administration of the dopamine receptor-blocking neuroleptics, 
haloperidol and fluphenazine, as well as by conditioning electrical stimulation 
of the substantia nigra.
Neuroleptic administration augmented the responses to 
cortical stimulation in 12 of 34 pallidal neurons.
Stimulation of the substantia 
nigra diminished the responses in 24 and augmented them in 6 of 63 of the tested 
neurons.
We propose from the present results, and in agreement with data from 
conceptually different studies done by others, that dopaminergic influences 
reduce the flow of information from the cortex to the pallidum.
This may 
constitute a focussing mechanism by which only information form the strongest 
cortical inputs would pass to the pallidum while less prominent activity would 
be lost.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(85)90070-3
PMID: 2866467 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Exogenous human recombinant interleukin‐10 protects the kidney against hypoxia‐induced renal injury in immature rats <jats:p><jats:bold>Aim: </jats:bold> The purpose of this study was to determine the effects of exogenous human recombinant interleukin‐10 (rhIL‐10) on hypoxia‐induced renal injury in immature rats.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Method: </jats:bold> The study was performed on 1‐day‐old Sprague–Dawley rat pups. Group 1 (<jats:italic>n</jats:italic> = 8) served as non‐hypoxic controls. Group 2 (untreated
 <jats:italic>n</jats:italic> = 8) rats were subjected to hypoxia‐reoxygenation (H/O) and were then returned to their mothers.
Group 3 (rhIL‐10 treated, <jats:italic>n</jats:italic> = 8) rats were subjected to H/O, were returned to their mothers, and were treated with rhIL‐10 (75 µg/kg subcutaneously) for the next 3 days.
All animals were killed on day 4 and renal specimens were obtained to determine the tissue level of malondialdehyde (MDA) and histological changes.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Results: </jats:bold> In the untreated group, moderate or severe renal tubular necrosis was observed However, the tubular necrosis score was significantly less in the rhIL‐10 treated rats than in the untreated rats (<jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.05).
In the untreated group, MDA levels were significantly increased compared with the control and rhIL‐10 groups (<jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.001 and <jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.05, respectively).
In the rhIL‐10 treated group, MDA levels were not significantly different compared with the control group.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Conclusion: </jats:bold> RhIL‐10 has a protective effect against hypoxia‐induced renal injury in immature rats by depression of tissue MDA level and renal tubular necrosis score.</jats:p>
NMDA-induced preconditioning attenuates synaptic plasticity in the rat hippocampus 1. Brain Res. 2006 Feb 16;1073-1074:183-9. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2005.12.008. 
Epub 2006 Feb 10.

NMDA-induced preconditioning attenuates synaptic plasticity in the rat 
hippocampus.

Youssef FF(1)
 Addae JI, Stone TW.
Author information:
(1)Department of Preclinical Sciences, Faculty of Medical Sciences, University 
of the West Indies, St. Augustine Campus, Trinidad and Tobago.
fmyoussef@tstt.net.tt

It was recently demonstrated that glutamate could precondition hippocampal 
slices against the damaging effects of hypoxia, and we have now extended this 
observation by investigating (i) the ability of glutamate receptor agonists to 
act as preconditioning agents and (ii) the effects of preconditioning on 
synaptic plasticity.
Using rat hippocampal slices, 15 microM NMDA applied for 10 
min (chemical insult) caused abolition of the population spike potentials (PS) 
followed by approximately 33% recovery at 60 min post-insult.
In comparison, a 5 
min preconditioning exposure of 10 microM NMDA given 30 min prior to the insult 
significantly improved the recovery to 69%.
Preconditioning did not alter paired 
pulse facilitation; however, it significantly enhanced paired pulse depression 
and reduced population spike long-term potentiation (PS-LTP) and LTP in field 
recordings.
This effect on PS-LTP appeared to be NMDA receptor dependent and was 
blocked by the nitric oxide synthase inhibitors nitro-L-arginine methyl ester 
(L-NAME) and 7-nitro indazole (7-NI) but not by the adenosine receptor 
antagonist 8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine (DPCPX).
We conclude that 
preconditioning by NMDA can improve recovery following acute insults but may 
have deleterious effects on neuronal plasticity.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2005.12.008
PMID: 16472785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hippocampal Leptin Suppresses Methamphetamine‐Induced Hyperlocomotion <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> Leptin is an anorexigenic peptide which is synthesized in white adipose tissue. The actions of leptin are mediated by the leptin receptor which is abundantly localized in the hypothalamus and is involved in energy regulation and balance. Recently
 there has been evidence suggesting that the leptin receptor is also present in the hippocampus and may be involved with hippocampal excitability and long‐term depression.
To investigate the physiological function of leptin signalling in the hippocampus, we studied the effects of leptin on methamphetamine‐induced ambulatory hyperactivity by utilizing intra‐hippocampal infusion (i.h.)
in mice.
Our results show that the infusion of leptin (5 ng each bilaterally i.h.)
does not affect the basal ambulatory activity but significantly suppresses methamphetamine‐induced ambulatory hyperactivity as compared to saline‐infused controls.
Interestingly, higher dose of leptin increases the suppression of the methamphetamine‐induced ambulatory hyperactivity.
The i.h.
infusion of leptin did not activate the JAK‐STAT pathway, which is the cellular signalling pathway through which leptin acts in the hypothalamus.
The infusion of leptin also did not affect activation of p42/44 MAPK which is known to be another leptin‐induced signalling pathway in the brain.
These results demonstrate that leptin has a novel potential suppressive effect on methamphetamine‐induced hyperlocomotion and also suggest that there must be an alternative pathway in the hippocampus through which leptin signalling is being mediated.</jats:p>
Halothane Inhibition of Canine Myocardial Adenylate Cyclase-Modulation by Endogenous Factors 1. Anesth Analg. 1984 Mar;63(3):285-9.

Halothane inhibition of canine myocardial adenylate cyclase--modulation by 
endogenous factors.

Bernstein KJ
 Verosky M, Triner L.

We have hypothesized that the halothane-induced depression of myocardial 
contractility can be explained, at least in part, by halothane's depression of 
adenylate cyclase, previously demonstrated in whole homogenates of myocardial 
tissue.
Canine myocardial sarcolemmal membranes, which contain the adenylate 
cyclase of myocardial cells, were separated from other cellular constituents.
Halothane did not depress catecholamine-stimulated adenylate cyclase activity in 
this preparation.
Reconstitution of the sarcolemmal membrane preparation with a 
100,000 X g adenylate cyclase-free supernatant restored the depressant effect of 
halothane on adenylate cyclase stimulated by guanosine triphosphate (GTP) 100 
microM alone (-55%, P less than 0.01) or in combination with l-isoproterenol 1 
microM (-38%, P less than 0.05) or 2.5 microM (-40%, P less than 0.01).
Dilution 
of the supernatant to half-strength decreased the magnitude of the 
halothane-induced depression of adenylate cyclase activity to 19% (P less than 
0.01); at one-quarter dilution, the effect was no longer significant.
This study 
demonstrates the presence of endogenous modulators of the action of halothane on 
canine myocardial adenylate cyclase that can be reversibly separated from the 
adenylate cyclase complex.
PMID: 6703345 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Distinctive In Vivo Kinetics of the New σ<sub>1</sub> Receptor Ligands (<i>R</i>)-(+)- and (<i>S</i>)-(–)-<sup>18</sup>F-Fluspidine in Porcine Brain 1. J Nucl Med. 2014 Oct;55(10):1730-6. doi: 10.2967/jnumed.114.137562. Epub 2014 
Jul 28.

Distinctive in vivo kinetics of the new σ1 receptor ligands (R)-(+)- and 
(S)-(-)-18F-fluspidine in porcine brain.

Brust P(1)
 Deuther-Conrad W(2), Becker G(3), Patt M(3), Donat CK(2), 
Stittsworth S(4), Fischer S(2), Hiller A(2), Wenzel B(2), Dukic-Stefanovic S(2), 
Hesse S(3), Steinbach J(2), Wünsch B(5), Lever SZ(6), Sabri O(3).
Author information:
(1)Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Institute of Radiopharmaceutical Cancer 
Research, Leipzig, Germany p.brust@hzdr.de.
(2)Helmholtz-Zentrum Dresden-Rossendorf, Institute of Radiopharmaceutical Cancer 
Research, Leipzig, Germany.
(3)Department of Nuclear Medicine and IFB Adiposity Diseases, Universität 
Leipzig, Leipzig, Germany.
(4)Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri.
(5)Department of Pharmaceutical and Medicinal Chemistry, Westfälische 
Wilhelms-Universität Münster, Münster, Germany; and.
(6)Department of Chemistry, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri MU 
Research Reactor, University of Missouri, Columbia, Missouri.
Because of their involvement in growth and survival signaling cascades, the σ(1) 
receptors (σ(1)Rs) represent a novel target for the treatment of cancer and 
several brain diseases such as depression and neurodegeneration.
From a series 
of σ1R-specific (18)F-fluoroalkylated spirocyclic piperidines, we have chosen 
(18)F-fluspidine for detailed investigation of the in vivo kinetics of the 
(R)-(+)- and (S)-(-)-enantiomers to identify their potential for imaging in 
humans.
METHODS: Enantiopure tosylate precursors for radiolabeling were obtained using 
chiral preparative high-performance liquid chromatography and used for 
radiosynthesis of both (18)F-fluspidine enantiomers by nucleophilic substitution 
with K-(18)F-F-Kryptofix 222-carbonate complex in a synthesis module.
Brain 
pharmacokinetics were investigated by dynamic PET studies in piglets under 
baseline and blocking conditions using the highly selective σ1R agonist SA4503.
Standardized uptake values (SUVs) were calculated for 24 MR-defined brain 
regions.
Total distribution volume (V(T)) and binding potentials (k3'/k4) of 
(S)-(-)- and (R)-(+)-(18)F-fluspidine were estimated.
Furthermore, V(T) values 
were estimated by graphical analysis using Logan plots.
RESULTS: The (S)- and (R)-tosylates were obtained in excellent enantiomeric 
purities (>98% and >96% enantiomeric excess, respectively).
(S)-(-)- and 
(R)-(+)-(18)F-fluspidine were synthesized within approximately 70 min 
(radiochemical yield, 35%-45%; specific activity, 650-870 GBq/μmol; 
radiochemical purity, >99%).
Both radiotracers displayed different brain uptake 
kinetics.
Although the initial brain uptake was similar, the SUV at the end of 
the study differed significantly (P < 0.05), with (R)-(+)-(18)F-fluspidine 
showing about 60%-150% higher values.
Administration of SA4503 reduced SUV 
almost equally for both radiotracers by approximately 65%.
Furthermore, k(3)' 
was significantly decreased under blocking conditions in almost all regions 
((S)-(-)-(18)F-fluspidine, -90%-95%; (R)-(+)-(18)F-fluspidine, -70%-90%) whereas 
effects on k(4) differed according to the particular brain region.
V(T) 
estimated by both graphical analysis using Logan plots and full nonlinear 
kinetic analysis revealed significant inhibition for both radiotracers under 
blocking conditions.
CONCLUSION: Both (S)-(-)- and (R)-(+)-(18)F-fluspidine appear to be suitable for 
σ1R imaging in humans.
The different pharmacokinetics of 
(S)-(-)-(18)F-fluspidine and (R)-(+)-(18)F-fluspidine may have the potential for 
application in the diagnostics of different pathologic conditions.
© 2014 by the Society of Nuclear Medicine and Molecular Imaging, Inc.

DOI: 10.2967/jnumed.114.137562
PMID: 25071097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Spontaneous Activity Defines Effective Convergence Ratios in an Inhibitory Circuit <jats:p>Many neurons fire spontaneously
 and the rate of this firing is subject to neuromodulation.
How this firing affects functional connectivity within a neural network remains largely unexplored.
Here we show that changes in spontaneous firing of cartwheel interneurons in the mouse dorsal cochlear nucleus (DCN) alter the effective convergence ratio of interneurons onto their postsynaptic targets through short-term synaptic plasticity.
Spontaneous firing of cartwheel cells led to activity-dependent synaptic depression of individual cartwheel synapses.
Depression was rapid and profound at stimulation frequencies between 10 and 200 Hz, suggesting the presence of high release probability (Pr) vesicles at these inhibitory synapses.
Weak, transient synaptic facilitation could be induced after synapses were predepressed, indicating that low-Pr vesicles are also recruited, and may thus support steady-state transmission.
A two-pool vesicle depletion model with 10-fold differences in Pr could account for the synaptic depression over a wide range of stimulus conditions.
As a result of depression during high spontaneous activity, more cartwheel interneurons were required for effective inhibition.
Convergence of four interneurons was sufficient to compensate for the effects of depression during physiologically expected rates of activity.
By simulating synaptic release during spontaneous firing, we found that recruitment of low-Pr vesicles at the synapse plays a critical role in maintaining effective inhibition within a small population of interneurons.
The interplay between spontaneous spiking, short-term synaptic plasticity, and vesicle recruitment thus determines the effective size of a convergent neural network.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>SIGNIFICANCE STATEMENT</jats:bold>We examined the relationship between the structure of a small neural circuit and the properties of its individual synapses.
Successful synaptic inhibition of a target cell firing requires a critical inhibitory synaptic strength.
Synapses often become depressed during spontaneous presynaptic activity, and this increases the number of presynaptic neurons needed to mediate inhibition.
We show that depression is limited by the presence of a pool of vesicles that resist depletion.
Thus, the size of this vesicle pool determines the size of the circuit needed to mediate inhibition during different patterns of activity.</jats:p>
GPER1 Stimulation Alters Posttranslational Modification of RGSz1 and Induces Desensitization of 5-HT&lt;sub&gt;1A&lt;/sub&gt; Receptor Signaling in the Rat Hypothalamus <jats:p>Hyperactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is a consistent biological characteristic of depression
 and response normalization coincides with clinical responsiveness to antidepressant medications.
Desensitization of serotonin 1A receptor (5-HT&lt;sub&gt;1A&lt;/sub&gt;R) signaling in the hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus of the hypothalamus (PVN) follows selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressant treatment and contributes to the antidepressant response.
Estradiol alone produces a partial desensitization of 5-HT&lt;sub&gt;1A&lt;/sub&gt;R signaling and synergizes with SSRIs to result in a complete and more rapid desensitization than with SSRIs alone as measured by a decrease in the oxytocin and adrenocorticotrophic hormone (ACTH) responses to 5-HT&lt;sub&gt;1A&lt;/sub&gt;R stimulation.
G protein-coupled estrogen receptor 1 (GPER1) is necessary for estradiol-induced desensitization of 5-HT&lt;sub&gt;1A&lt;/sub&gt;R signaling, although the underlying mechanisms are still unclear.
We now find that stimulation of GPER1 with the selective agonist G-1 and nonselective stimulation of estrogen receptors dramatically alter isoform expression of a key component of the 5-HT&lt;sub&gt;1A&lt;/sub&gt;R signaling pathway, RGSz1, a GTPase-activating protein selective for Gαz, the Gα subunit necessary for 5-HT&lt;sub&gt;1A&lt;/sub&gt;R-mediated hormone release.
RGSz1 isoforms are differentially glycosylated, SUMOylated, and phosphorylated, and differentially distributed in subcellular organelles.
High-molecular-weight RGSz1 is SUMOylated and glycosylated, localized to the detergent-resistant microdomain (DRM) of the cell membrane, and increased by estradiol and G-1 treatment.
Because activated Gαz also localizes to the DRM, increased DRM-localized RGSz1 by estradiol and G-1 could reduce Gαz activity, functionally uncoupling 5-HT&lt;sub&gt;1A&lt;/sub&gt;R signaling.
Peripheral G-1 treatment produced a partial reduction in oxytocin and ACTH responses to 5-HT&lt;sub&gt;1A&lt;/sub&gt;R stimulation similar to direct injections into the PVN.
Together, these results identify GPER1 and RGSz1 as novel targets for the treatment of depression.</jats:p>
The mechanism of antidepressant-like effects of piroxicam in rats 1. J Pharmacol Pharmacother. 2015 Jan-Mar;6(1):7-12. doi:
10.4103/0976-500X.149133.

The mechanism of antidepressant-like effects of piroxicam in rats.

Santiago RM(1)
 Zaminelli T(1), Bassani TB(1), Boschen SL(1), Lima MM(2), Da 
Cunha C(1), Andreatini R(1), Vital MA(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Federal University of Paraná, Brazil.
(2)Department of Physiology, Federal University of Paraná, Brazil.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the antidepressant-like effect of piroxicam with a 
focus on serotonergic neurotransmission.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Rats were randomly distributed into the following groups: 
0.9% saline control; 3 mg/kg pizotifen; 10 mg/kg sertraline; 10 mg/kg piroxicam; 
10 mg/kg sertraline + 10 mg/kg piroxicam; 10 mg/kg sertraline + 3 mg/kg 
pizotifen; and 10 mg/kg piroxicam + 3 mg/kg pizotifen.
All the drugs were 
dissolved in 0.9% saline.
Three administrations of the drugs (piroxicam and 
sertraline) were performed 1, 5 and 24 h before testing the animals in the open 
field followed by the forced swim test (FST).
Piroxicam and sertraline were 
administered orally by gavage and pizotifen was administered intraperitoneally 
30 min before gavage.
Immediately after the FST, the hippocampi were rapidly 
dissected for neurochemical analysis in high-performance liquid chromatography.
RESULTS: Acute treatment with piroxicam promoted an antidepressant-like effect 
in the FST, which was associated with an increase in serotonin levels in the 
hippocampus.
This effect was potentiated in the piroxicam + sertraline group but 
counteracted by administration of the non-selective serotonin receptor 
antagonist pizotifen.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that the antidepressant-like effect of 
piroxicam in the FST is mediated by the serotonin system; however, by different 
mechanisms from those of sertraline.
DOI: 10.4103/0976-500X.149133
PMCID: PMC4319255
PMID: 25709346

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest: None declared.
The quantitative measurement of steroids secreted by isolated adrenals from sodium depleted rats 1. Steroids. 1974 Mar;23(3):443-54. doi: 10.1016/0039-128x(74)90094-4.

The quantitative measurement of steroids secreted by isolated adrenals from 
sodium depleted rats.

Zuccarello WA
 Frishmuth GJ, Rice EG.
DOI: 10.1016/0039-128x(74)90094-4
PMID: 4828063 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Relationship of orthostatic blood pressure to white matter hyperintensities and subcortical volumes in late-life depression <jats:sec><jats:title>Background</jats:title><jats:p>Structural brain abnormalities are associated with late-life major depression
 with numerous studies reporting increased white matter hyperintensities (WMH) and reduced cortical/subcortical grey matter volumes.
There is strong evidence linking vascular disease to WMH, but limited evidence on its association with subcortical volumes.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Aims</jats:title><jats:p>To investigate the relationship of orthostatic blood pressure changes to WMH and subcortical grey matter volumes in late-life depression.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Method</jats:title><jats:p>Thirty-eight people with depression and a similarly aged comparison group (<jats:italic>n</jats:italic> = 30) underwent fluid attenuated inversion recovery (FLAIR) and <jats:italic>T</jats:italic><jats:sup>1</jats:sup>-weighted magnetic resonance imaging as well as systematic orthostatic blood pressure assessments.
Volumetric estimates of WMH and subcortical grey matter were obtained for each participant and the relationship to blood pressure drop on active stand was examined.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p>An association between orthostatic systolic blood pressure drop and WMH volumes in temporal and parietal regions was found in the depression group (age-corrected partial correlation <jats:italic>r’</jats:italic> = 0.31–0.35, <jats:italic>P</jats:italic>&lt;0.05).
Subcortical volumes were not related to blood pressure changes or WMH volumes in either group.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title><jats:p>We found evidence for an association between the degree of orthostatic systolic blood pressure drop and WMH volume in the depression group.
Since blood pressure drops lead to WMH in animals our findings suggest systolic blood pressure drops may be a factor contributing to these lesions in late-life depression.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Resolving the Onset of Antidepressants' Clinical Actions 1. J Clin Psychopharmacol. 2006 Dec;26(6):549-53. doi: 
10.1097/01.jcp.0000246220.04422.de.

Resolving the onset of antidepressants' clinical actions: critical for clinical 
practice and new drug development.

Katz MM
 Bowden CL, Berman N, Frazer A.

DOI: 10.1097/01.jcp.0000246220.04422.de
PMID: 17110809 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
SYSTEMIC ARTERIAL PRESSURE CHANGES CAUSED BY SYMPATHOMIMETIC AMINES AND INFLUENCE OF NOREPINEPHRINE INFUSION ON CHRONICALLY RESERPINIZED DOGS 1. Kurume Med J. 1971;18(2):111-6. doi: 10.2739/kurumemedj.18.111.

Systemic arterial pressure changes cased by sympathomimetic amines and influence 
of norepinephrine infusion on chronically reserpinized dogs.

Takasaki K.

DOI: 10.2739/kurumemedj.18.111
PMID: 4396621 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of electroconvulsive shock on the glutamate level and the hyperphosphorylation of protein tau in depression rat models whose olfactory bulbs were removed. 1. Zhongguo Yi Xue Ke Xue Yuan Xue Bao. 2012 Jun;34(3):216-21. doi: 
10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2012.03.005.

Effect of electroconvulsive shock on the glutamate level and the 
hyperphosphorylation of protein tau in depression rat models whose olfactory 
bulbs were removed.

Liu C(1)
 Min S, Wei K, Liu D, Dong J, Luo J, Liu XB.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, the First Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing 
Medical University, Chongqing 400016, China.
OBJECTIVE: To explore the effect of the electroconvulsive shock (ECS) on the 
glutamate level and the hyperphosphorylation of tau protein in depressed rats.
METHODS: The depression rat models whose olfactory bulbs were removed were 
established.
Using the analysis of variance of factorial design, we set up two 
intervention factors including electric current (three levels: 25, 50, and 75 
mA) and duration (three levels: 3, 6, and 9 times), which constituted 9 
combinations (n=6).
Fifty-four adult depression rat models whose olfactory bulbs 
were removed were randomly divided into nine experimental groups (n=6 in each 
group).
The hippocampus was removed within 12 hours after the ECS finished.
The 
level of glutamate in the hippocampus was detected by high-performance liquid 
chromatography, and that of Tau protein, which includes p-PHF-1(Ser396/404), 
p-AT8(Ser199/202), and p-12E8(Ser262), in the hippocampus with Western blot 
analysis.
RESULTS: The glutamate level and the hyperphosphorylation of tau protein in the 
hippocampus of depressed rats remarkably increased.
The changes of the 
hyperphosphorylation of tau protein were correlated with the electric current 
and duration of ECS, and these two factors showed an synergic effect.
CONCLUSION: ECS enhances the hyperphosphorylation of tau protein in the 
hippocampus of depressed rats by up-regulating the glutamate level.
DOI: 10.3881/j.issn.1000-503X.2012.03.005
PMID: 22776652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Application of an optogenetic byway for perturbing neuronal activity via glial photostimulation <jats:p>Dynamic activity of glia has repeatedly been demonstrated
 but if such activity is independent from neuronal activity, glia would not have any role in the information processing in the brain or in the generation of animal behavior.
Evidence for neurons communicating with glia is solid, but the signaling pathway leading back from glial-to-neuronal activity was often difficult to study.
Here, we introduced a transgenic mouse line in which channelrhodopsin-2, a light-gated cation channel, was expressed in astrocytes.
Selective photostimulation of these astrocytes in vivo triggered neuronal activation.
Using slice preparations, we show that glial photostimulation leads to release of glutamate, which was sufficient to activate AMPA receptors on Purkinje cells and to induce long-term depression of parallel fiber-to-Purkinje cell synapses through activation of metabotropic glutamate receptors.
In contrast to neuronal synaptic vesicular release, glial activation likely causes preferential activation of extrasynaptic receptors that appose glial membrane.
Finally, we show that neuronal activation by glial stimulation can lead to perturbation of cerebellar modulated motor behavior.
These findings demonstrate that glia can modulate the tone of neuronal activity and behavior.
This animal model is expected to be a potentially powerful approach to study the role of glia in brain function.</jats:p>
[Thrombocyte aggregation in depression of the function of the anticoagulation system of blood
 caused by atherogenic diet].
1.
Kardiologiia.
1976 May;16(5):139-41.
[Thrombocyte aggregation in depression of the function of the anticoagulation 
system of blood, caused by atherogenic diet].
[Article in Russian]

Bazazian GG, Pastorova VE, Liapina LA.
PMID: 950749 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Molecular mechanisms of decreased interleukin-2 production after thermal injury. 1. Surgery. 1993 Aug;114(2):407-14; discussion 414-5.

Molecular mechanisms of decreased interleukin-2 production after thermal injury.

O'Riordain DS(1)
 Mendez MV, O'Riordain MG, Molloy RG, Holzheimer RG, Collins K, 
Saporoschetz I, Mannick JA, Rodrick ML.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Harvard Medical School, Brigham and Women's Hospital, 
Boston, Mass.
02115.
BACKGROUND: Among the fundamental immunologic abnormalities induced by serious 
traumatic or thermal injury are alterations in T cell activation, reduced 
lymphocyte interleukin-2 (IL-2) production, and associated depression of T 
lymphocyte proliferation.
This study attempts to localize the cellular 
mechanisms underlying abnormal IL-2 production in thermal injury.
METHODS: Following National Institutes of Health guidelines, 150 A/J mice were 
anesthetized, subjected to a 20% full-thickness scald burn injury or sham burn, 
and killed at intervals from 4 to 21 days later; splenocytes were harvested for 
in vitro studies.
For measurement of IL-2 production, cells were cultured with 
either concanavalin A or a combination of the phorbol ester PMA, which directly 
activates protein kinase C, and the calcium ionophore A23187, which increases 
intracellular calcium.
Cytokine mRNA expression was measured by Northern blot 
analysis and IL-2 production by bioassay.
RESULTS: Both IL-2 production and IL-2 mRNA expression were consistently 
suppressed in concanavalin A-stimulated cells from burned mice compared with 
sham burns.
This suppression of IL-2 and IL-2 mRNA also occurred when T cells 
were activated with PMA and A23187, bypassing the earlier stages of the signal 
transduction mechanism.
IL-1 beta and tumor necrosis factor-alpha mRNA 
expression were consistently increased in burned animals, indicating that 
decreased IL-2 mRNA expression was specific to IL-2 and not representative of a 
global decrease in cytokine mRNA expression.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the principal cellular abnormalities 
that result in altered T cell activation and IL-2 production after thermal 
injury lie downstream of the initiating signal transduction events and before 
IL-2 gene transcription.
PMID: 8342142 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The "kynurenine shunt" and depression. 1. Adv Biochem Psychopharmacol. 1974;11(0):293-8.

The "kynurenine shunt" and depression.

Mangoni A.

PMID: 4276862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Evidence That the Periaqueductal Gray Matter Mediates the Facilitation of Panic-Like Reactions in Neonatally-Isolated Adult Rats 1. PLoS One. 2014 Mar 3;9(3):e90726. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090726.
eCollection  2014.

Evidence that the periaqueductal gray matter mediates the facilitation of 
panic-like reactions in neonatally-isolated adult rats.

Quintino-dos-Santos JW(1)
 Müller CJ(2), Bernabé CS(2), Rosa CA(2), Tufik S(3), 
Schenberg LC(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiological Sciences, Federal University of Espírito Santo, 
Vitória, ES, Brazil; Department of Sports, Federal University of Espírito Santo, 
Vitória, ES, Brazil.
(2)Department of Physiological Sciences, Federal University of Espírito Santo, 
Vitória, ES, Brazil.
(3)Department of Psychobiology, Federal University of São Paulo, São Paulo, SP, 
Brazil.
Plenty of evidence suggests that childhood separation anxiety (CSA) predisposes 
the subject to adult-onset panic disorder (PD).
As well, panic is frequently 
comorbid with both anxiety and depression.
The brain mechanisms whereby CSA 
predisposes to PD are but completely unknown in spite of the increasing evidence 
that panic attacks are mediated at midbrain's dorsal periaqueductal gray matter 
(DPAG).
Accordingly, here we examined whether the neonatal social isolation 
(NSI), a model of CSA, facilitates panic-like behaviors produced by electrical 
stimulations of DPAG of rats as adults.
Eventual changes in anxiety and 
depression were also assessed in the elevated plus-maze (EPM) and 
forced-swimming test (FST) respectively.
Male pups were subjected to 3-h daily 
isolations from post-natal day 2 (PN2) until weaning (PN21) allotting half of 
litters in individual boxes inside a sound-attenuated chamber (NSI, n = 26) 
whilst siblings (sham-isolated rats, SHAM, n = 27) and dam were moved to another 
box in a separate room.
Non-handled controls (CTRL, n = 18) remained undisturbed 
with dams until weaning.
As adults, rats were implanted with electrodes into the 
DPAG (PN60) and subjected to sessions of intracranial stimulation (PN65), EPM 
(PN66) and FST (PN67-PN68).
Groups were compared by Fisher's exact test 
(stimulation sites), likelihood ratio chi-square tests (stimulus-response 
threshold curves) and Bonferroni's post hoc t-tests (EPM and FST), for P<0.05.
Notably, DPAG-evoked panic-like responses of immobility, exophthalmus, trotting, 
galloping and jumping were markedly facilitated in NSI rats relative to both 
SHAM and CTRL groups.
Conversely, anxiety and depression scores either did not 
change or were even reduced in neonatally-handled groups relative to CTRL, 
respectively.
Data are the first behavioral evidence in animals that early-life 
separation stress produces the selective facilitation of panic-like behaviors in 
adulthood.
Most importantly, results implicate the DPAG not only in panic 
attacks but also in separation-anxious children's predispositions to the late 
development of PD.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0090726
PMCID: PMC3980704
PMID: 24594924 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Changes of neuronal activity in areas CA1 and CA3 during anoxia and normoxic or hyperoxic reoxygenation in juvenile rat organotypic hippocampal slice cultures 1. Brain Res. 2006 Jan 19;1069(1):207-15. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2005.11.025.
Epub  2005 Dec 27.

Changes of neuronal activity in areas CA1 and CA3 during anoxia and normoxic or 
hyperoxic reoxygenation in juvenile rat organotypic hippocampal slice cultures.

Hoffmann U(1)
 Pomper J, Graulich J, Zeller M, Schuchmann S, Gabriel S, Maier 
RF, Heinemann U.
Author information:
(1)Institut für Neurophysiologie, Tucholskystr.
2, D 10117 Berlin, Germany.
In neonates, asphyxia is usually followed by hyperoxic treatment.
In order to 
study whether hyperoxic reoxygenation might cause additional impairment of 
neuronal function, we subjected organotypic hippocampal slice cultures of 
juvenile rats (7 DIV, P6-8) to 30 min anoxia followed by 60 min hyperoxic or 
normoxic reoxygenation (95% or 19% O2, respectively).
Spontaneous and evoked 
field potentials as well as [Ca2+]o were recorded in the pyramidal layer of area 
CA1 or area CA3.
In area CA1, 30 min of anoxia led to decline of evoked field 
potential amplitudes by on average 67% and to profound changes in field 
potential characteristics and Ca2+ homeostasis which were not related to outcome 
after reoxygenation.
Hyperoxic reoxygenation resulted first in a fast recovery 
of the field potential amplitude to 82% of the control value and then, in 75% of 
slice cultures, in a large negative field potential shift accompanied by a 
prolonged decrease of [Ca2+]o and loss of excitability outlasting the 
experiment.
Recovery of field potential amplitude under normoxic conditions 
stayed poor, with a first increase to 51% and a second decrease to 22%.
In 
contrast, field potential amplitude in area CA3 recovered to 80% of the initial 
amplitude, irrespective of the reoxygenation mode.
The selective loss of 
function during hyperoxic reoxygenation in area CA1 might be a first sign of 
neuronal injury that we observed 1 h after end of hyperoxic reoxygenation in a 
previous study.
Whether the poor outcome after normoxic reoxygenation would 
favour long-term recovery remains to be determined.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2005.11.025
PMID: 16380097 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Augmentation of SSRI Effects on Serotonin by 5-HT2C Antagonists: Mechanistic Studies 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2007 Jul;32(7):1550-7. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301287. 
Epub 2007 Jan 3.

Augmentation of SSRI effects on serotonin by 5-HT2C antagonists: mechanistic 
studies.

Cremers TI(1)
 Rea K, Bosker FJ, Wikström HV, Hogg S, Mørk A, Westerink BH.
Author information:
(1)Brains-on-Line, Antonius Deusinglaan 1, Groningen, The Netherlands.
t.i.f.h.cremers@rug.nl

The treatment of depression may be improved by using an augmentation approach 
involving selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in combination with 
compounds that focus on antagonism of inhibitory serotonin receptors.
Using 
microdialysis coupled to HPLC, it has recently been shown that the systemic 
co-administration of 5-HT(2C) antagonists with SSRIs augmented the acute effect 
of SSRIs on extracellular 5-HT.
In this paper, we have investigated the 
mechanism through which this augmentation occurs.
The increase in extracellular 
5-HT was not observed when both compounds were locally infused.
However, varying 
the route of administration for both compounds differentially revealed that an 
augmentation took place when the 5-HT(2C) antagonist was locally infused into 
ventral hippocampus and the SSRI given systemically, but not when systemic 
5-HT(2C) antagonist was co-administered with the local infusion of citalopram.
This suggests that the release of extracellular serotonin in ventral hippocampus 
may be controlled by (an)other brain area(s).
As 5-HT(2C) receptors are not 
considered to be autoreceptors, this would implicate that other neurotransmitter 
systems are involved in this process.
To investigate which neurotransmitter 
systems were involved in the interaction, systemic citalopram was challenged 
with several glutamatergic, GABA-ergic, noradrenergic, and dopaminergic 
compounds to determine their effects on serotonin release in ventral 
hippocampus.
It was determined that the involvement of glutamate, 
norepinephrine, and dopamine in the augmentation did not seem likely, whereas 
evidence implicated a role for the GABA-ergic system in the augmentation.
DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301287
PMID: 17203017 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[A low-molecular blood serum factor suppressing myocardial function in traumatic shock complicated by massive blood loss]. 1. Anesteziol Reanimatol. 1988 Sep-Oct;(5):42-4.

[A low-molecular blood serum factor suppressing myocardial function in traumatic 
shock complicated by massive blood loss].

[Article in Russian]

Antonenko VT
 Treshchinskiĭ AI, Korolev IuN, Shlapak IP.
PMID: 3218778 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
CARDIOVASCULAR DEPRESSION AND THERMOREGULATORY DISRUPTION CAUSED BY PENTOTHAL/HALOTHANE ANESTHESIA IN THE HARBOR SEAL
 Phoca vitulina 1.
J Wildl Dis.
1981 Jan;17(1):121-30. doi: 10.7589/0090-3558-17.1.121.
Cardiovascular depression and thermoregulatory disruption caused by 
pentothal/halothane anesthesia in the harbor seal, Phoca vitulina.
Sinnett EE, Wahrenbrock EA, Kooyman GL.
Anesthesia was induced in the harbor seal (Phoca vitulina) with an intravenous 
injection of 10 mg/kg thiopental sodium; this was followed by halothane (1%) 
anesthesia for up to 9.5 h. Cardiac output was reduced to 30% of the 
pre-anesthesia value (from an average of 11.5 1/min to 3.5 1/min) while systemic 
blood pressure fell from an average of 150/110 to 80/60.
Arterial oxygen partial 
pressures were somewhat depressed (58-72 Torr) during ventilation with air.
Heart rate became stable at 90-100 beats/min.
Hypothermia was an occasional 
problem during the first hour of anesthesia, but this trend reversed and gave 
way to hyperthermia during prolonged anesthesia.
DOI: 10.7589/0090-3558-17.1.121
PMID: 7253094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long‐term potentiation of transmitter release induced by repetitive presynaptic activities in bull‐frog sympathetic ganglia. <jats:p>Long‐lasting potentiation of transmitter release induced by repetitive presynaptic activities in bull‐frog sympathetic ganglia was studied by recording intracellularly fast excitatory post‐synaptic potentials (fast e.p.s.p.s.). Following a brief period of post‐tetanic potentiation or depression (less than 10 min)
 the amplitude of the fast e.p.s.p.
was potentiated for a period between several tens of minutes and more than 2 h in response to tetanic stimulation of the preganglionic nerve in twenty‐one out of twenty‐eight cells.
Quantal analysis revealed that this long‐term potentiation of the fast e.p.s.p.
(l.t.p.)
was accompanied by an increase in quantal content m (in nine out of twenty‐one cells), quantal size (four cells) or both (eight cells).
The increased quantal content (presynaptic l.t.p.)
declined exponentially (ten cells) or decayed gradually to a certain enhanced level which lasted several hours.
In contrast, the increased quantal size grew with a relatively long latency (10‐25 min) and remained relatively constant for at least 2 h. The magnitude of presynaptic l.t.p.
increased with increased duration of the presynaptic tetanus (33 Hz) from 2 to 5 s. No l.t.p.
was elicited by a 1‐s tetanus, whereas the time course appears to be independent of the tetanus duration and the magnitude of l.t.p.
There was a positive correlation between the magnitude of presynaptic l.t.p.
and the pre‐tetanic quantal content up to m = 3, but the former deviated from linear regression when the value of the latter exceeded 3.
No l.t.p.
occurred when quantal content was less than 0.5.
A tetanus (33 Hz, 10 s) applied in Ca2+‐free solution elicited no presynaptic l.t.p., while the same tetanus in normal Ringer solution produced a large presynaptic l.t.p.
Presynaptic l.t.p.
was enhanced in magnitude at low temperature (8‐10 degrees C).
These results demonstrate the existence of a use‐dependent, long‐term potentiation of transmitter release in bull‐frog sympathetic ganglia.
Several possible mechanisms are discussed in terms of Ca2+‐buffering mechanisms of the presynaptic nerve terminals.</jats:p>
Enhanced cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation in the rat hippocampal dentate gyrus following myocardial infarction 1. Neurosci Lett. 2009 Feb 6;450(3):275-80. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.11.057.
Epub  2008 Dec 3.

Enhanced cell proliferation and neuroblast differentiation in the rat 
hippocampal dentate gyrus following myocardial infarction.

Hwang IK(1)
 Yoo KY, Han TH, Lee CH, Choi JH, Yi SS, Lee SY, Ryu PD, Yoon YS, 
Won MH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and Cell Biology, College of Veterinary Medicine and 
BK21 Program for Veterinary Science, Seoul National University, Seoul 151-742, 
South Korea.
Basic and clinical studies have revealed that depression is frequently observed 
following myocardial infarction (MI).
We observed changes in neurons in the 
subgranular zone of the hippocampal dentate gyrus (DG) 14 days after chronic 
cardiac ischemia.
Cresyl violet staining was conducted to examine 
neurodegeneration.
Cresyl violet-positive neurons in the hippocampus in the 
MI-operated group were similar to those in the sham-operated group, and 
Fluoro-Jade B-positive cells were not observed in either group.
Next, we 
observed changes in cell proliferation using Ki67 and in the differentiation of 
neuroblasts using doublecortin (DCX) in the DG.
The number of Ki67- and 
DCX-positive cells in the subgranular zone of the DG in the MI-operated group 
was significantly increased compared to that in the sham-operated group.
In 
addition, DCX-positive processes were prominent in the MI group.
These results 
suggest that MI may influence cell proliferation and affect neuroblast 
differentiation in the subgranular zone of the DG.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2008.11.057
PMID: 19071196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Melanophore dispersion in the minnow Phoxinus phoxinus (L.) 1. Comp Biochem Physiol. 1969 Jan;28(1):55-65. doi: 10.1016/0010-406x(69)91321-8.

Melanophore dispersion in the minnow Phoxinus phoxinus (L.).

Grove DJ.

DOI: 10.1016/0010-406x(69)91321-8
PMID: 5777402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of newly synthesized 1
2,4-triazino[5,6-b]indole-3-thione derivatives on olfactory bulbectomy induced depression in rats 1.
Asian Pac J Trop Biomed.
2012 Dec;2(12):992-8. doi: 
10.1016/S2221-1691(13)60012-X.
Effect of newly synthesized 1,2,4-triazino[5,6-b]indole-3-thione derivatives on 
olfactory bulbectomy induced depression in rats.
Aswar UM(1), Kalshetti PP, Shelke SM, Bhosale SH, Bodhankar SL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, STES's Sinhgad Institute of Pharmacy, Narhe, 
Pune-411041,India.
OBJECTIVE: To study the derivatives of 1,2,4-triazino[5,6-b]indole-3-thione for 
antidepressant activity in olfactory bulbectomized (OBX) rats.
Out of various 
derivatives tested for acute tail suspension test, the two derivatives showing 
prominent action were selected for bilateral olfactory bulbectomy model of 
chronic depression in rats.
METHODS: The sub acute effects of 14-day oral pretreatment of two derivatives 
labeled as 3a (70 mg/kg) and 3r (70 mg/kg), imipramine (20 mg/kg), fluoxetine 
(30 mg/kg) and moclobemide (15 mg/kg) were evaluated on bilateral bulbectomy 
induced rise in body weight, hyperphagia, hyperactivity, and on sexual 
dysfunction.
The serum sodium concentration, body temperature, and heart rate 
were also recorded.
RESULTS: The derivatives 3a and 3r showed reversal of drop in body weight, 
reversed OBX induced hyperactivity, normalized body temperature, heart rate, and 
serum sodium concentration.
In elevated maze test, moclobemide, 3a, 3r treatment 
significantly reduced time spent in open arm as compared to OBX rats.
3a and 3r 
also improved sexual behavior parameters.
CONCLUSIONS: The present study shows promising antidepressant action and 
provides a proof of concept for the chronic treatment of 3a, 3r to treat 
depression.
DOI: 10.1016/S2221-1691(13)60012-X
PMCID: PMC3621477
PMID: 23593581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest statement: We declare that 
we have no conflict of interest.
Urinary Excretion of Noradrenaline after Treatment with α‐Methyldopa: Inhibition by a Central Nervous Mechanism <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Normal rats treated with <jats:italic>L</jats:italic>‐α‐methyldopa (400 mg/kg i.p.) after inhibition of the peripheral <jats:italic>L</jats:italic>‐DOPA decarboxylase by α‐methyldopa hydrazine excreted significantly less noradrenaline in the urine. The adrenaline excretion was only insignificantly reduced. The results indicate that treatment with a‐methyldopa can inhibit the release of noradrenaline from the sympathetic nerves by decreasing the impulse flow from the central nervous system. The adrenal medulla is influenced to a smaller degree.</jats:p>
Age-Dependent Action of Hydrocortisone Hemisuccinate upon Intravenous Glucose Tolerance in White Rats 1. Arch Int Physiol Biochim. 1972 Apr;80(2):367-71. doi:
10.3109/13813457209075290.

Age-dependent action of hydrocortisone hemisuccinate upon intravenous glucose 
tolerance in white rats.

Madar J
 Sildan N, Pora EA.
DOI: 10.3109/13813457209075290
PMID: 4114884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
&lt;i&gt;In vitro &lt;/i&gt;Relaxation of Arteries and Veins by Prazosin: Alpha-Adrenergic Blockade with No Direct Vasodilation <jats:p>Controversy exists regarding the mechanism by which prazosin lowers blood pressure without a marked increase in heart rate; a mechanism involving both sympatholytic activity and direct smooth muscle relaxation has been suggested. α-Adrenergic receptor blockade by prazosin is well documented and occurred to exogenous norepinephrine and to field stimulation &lt;i&gt;in vitro&lt;/i&gt; in rat arteries and veins. A parallel shift of the norepinephrine concentration response curves in the aorta and mesenteric artery contrasted with a nonparallel shift and a marked depression of maximal norepinephrine responses in the inferior vena cava
 portal, iliac and femoral veins.
Nonspecific direct acting vasodilators will antagonize contractile responses to all agonists.
However, prazosin (10&lt;sup&gt;–8&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;i&gt; M&lt;/i&gt;) specifically antagonized norepinephrine-induced responses.
Concentration response curves to potassium chloride or to serotonin were not affected in these rat tissues.
In addition, prazosin (up to 10&lt;sup&gt;–6&lt;/sup&gt;&lt;i&gt;M&lt;/i&gt;) did not significantly relax aortic tissue previously contracted with potassium chloride or serotonin, whereas the vasodilator, nitroglycerin, produced a clear relaxation.
Prazosin only reduced the tone of vessels contracted with norepinephrine.
These data indicate that prazosin exhibits minimal, if any, direct smooth muscle relaxant properties in concentrations higher than those producing α-adrenergic receptor blockade, and relaxes rat veins by a mechanism involving α-adrenergic receptor blockade.</jats:p>
Acetaldehyde depresses myocardial contraction and cardiac myocyte shortening in spontaneously hypertensive rats: role of intracellular Ca2+. 1. Cell Mol Biol (Noisy-le-grand). 1999 Jun;45(4):453-65.

Acetaldehyde depresses myocardial contraction and cardiac myocyte shortening in 
spontaneously hypertensive rats: role of intracellular Ca2+.

Brown RA(1)
 Jefferson L, Sudan N, Lloyd TC, Ren J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Wayne State University School of Medicine, Detroit, 
MI 48201, USA.
rbrown@med.wayne.edu

Acetaldehyde (ACA), the major metabolite of ethanol, exerts both stimulatory and 
depressive actions on myocardial tissue.
We have recently shown that ACA 
depresses myocardial contraction, cardiac myocyte shortening and intracellular 
Ca2+ transients in normal rat heart.
The purpose of the present study was to 
determine the influence of hypertension on ACA-induced myocardial actions.
Mechanical properties of left ventricular papillary muscles and ventricular 
myocytes isolated from both 25-week-old normotensive Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) and 
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHR) were evaluated using force-transducer and 
video edge-detection, respectively.
Papillary muscles and cardiac myocytes were 
electrically stimulated to contract at 0.5 Hz.
Contractile properties analyzed 
include: peak tension development (PTD), peak twitch amplitude (PTA), 
time-to-PTD/PTA (TPT/TPS), time-to-90% relaxation/relengthening (RT90/TR90) and 
maximal velocities of contraction/shortening and relaxation/relengthening 
(+/-VT/+/-dL/dt).
Intracellular Ca2+ transients were measured as fura-2 
fluorescence intensity (FFI) changes.
ACA (1-30 mM) depressed PTD without 
affecting other mechanical indices in both WKY and SHR myocardium, with maximal 
inhibition of 64 and 69%, respectively.
SHR myocytes exhibited increased cell 
dimension, baseline PTA and resting intracellular Ca2+ levels, compared to WKY 
counterparts.
ACA (0.03-30 mM) depressed PTA without affecting TPT, TR90 and 
+/-dL/dt.
The maximal inhibitions were 31 and 36% in WKY and SHR groups, 
respectively.
Interestingly, ACA exerted a biphasic effect on FFI, displaying 
potentiation at lower doses (<3 mM) and inhibition at higher doses (>3 mM).
The 
maximal increase in FFI changes were 19 and 22% at 0.3 mM and the maximal 
decreases were 37 and 29% at 30 mM ACA, in WKY and SHR myocytes, respectively.
Neither resting intracellular Ca2+ levels (FFI) nor fluorescence decay time 
(FDT) were affected by ACA.
The increase in FFI was attenuated by propranolol (1 
microM), whereas the decrease in FFI was reversed by BayK 8644 (1 microM).
These 
results suggest that hypertension does not appear to alter ACA-induced 
myocardial depression.
The mechanism underlying ACA-induced myocardial actions 
may involve increased beta-adrenergic activity at low doses and reduced Ca2+ 
entry and/or release at high doses.
PMID: 10432192 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Essential Role for Orbitofrontal Serotonin 1B Receptors in Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder-Like Behavior and Serotonin Reuptake Inhibitor Response in Mice 1. Biol Psychiatry. 2011 Dec 1;70(11):1039-48. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.07.032.  Epub 2011 Sep 13.

Essential role for orbitofrontal serotonin 1B receptors in obsessive-compulsive 
disorder-like behavior and serotonin reuptake inhibitor response in mice.

Shanahan NA(1)
 Velez LP, Masten VL, Dulawa SC.
Author information:
(1)Committee on Neurobiology, University of Chicago, IL 60637, USA.
Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry.
2011 Dec 1;70(11):1002-3. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.10.005.
BACKGROUND: Perseveration and sensorimotor gating deficits are core features of 
obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD).
Serotonin 1B receptor (5-HT1BR) agonists 
exacerbate OCD symptoms in patients and induce perseveration and sensorimotor 
gating deficits in mice.
Serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SRIs), but not 
noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors (NRIs), reduce OCD symptoms following 4 to 8 
weeks of treatment.
Using mice, we compared the effects of chronic SRI versus 
NRI treatment on 5-HT1BR-induced OCD-like behavior and 5-HT1BR sensitivity in 
orbitofrontal-subcortical OCD circuits.
Furthermore, we localized the 5-HT1BR 
population that mediates OCD-like behavior.
METHODS: Mice chronically received the SRI clomipramine or the NRI desipramine 
and were examined for 5-HT1BR-induced OCD-like behavior or 5-HT1BR binding and 
G-protein coupling in caudate putamen, nucleus accumbens, and orbitofrontal 
cortex.
Separate mice were tested for OCD- or depression-like behavior following 
4, 14, 21, 28, or 56 days of SRI treatment.
Finally, OCD-like behavior was 
assessed following intra-orbitofrontal 5-HT1BR agonist infusion or 
intra-orbitofrontal 5-HT1BR antagonist infusion coupled with systemic 5-HT1BR 
agonist treatment.
RESULTS: Effective, but not ineffective, OCD treatments reduced OCD-like 
behavior in mice with a time course that parallels the delayed therapeutic onset 
in OCD patients and downregulated 5-HT1BR expression in the orbitofrontal 
cortex.
Intra-orbitofrontal 5-HT1BR agonist infusion induced OCD-like behavior, 
and intra-orbitofrontal 5-HT1BR antagonist infusion blocked OCD-like effects of 
systemic 5-HT1BR agonist treatment.
CONCLUSIONS: These results indicate that orbitofrontal 5-HT1BRs are necessary 
and sufficient to induce OCD-like behavior in mice and that SRI pharmacotherapy 
reduces OCD-like behavior by desensitizing orbitofrontal 5-HT1BRs.
Our findings 
suggest an essential role for orbitofrontal 5-HT1BRs in OCD pathophysiology and 
treatment.
Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2011.07.032
PMCID: PMC3310222
PMID: 21920503 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of simulated microgravity on nitric oxide level in cardiac myocytes and its mechanism 1. Sci China C Life Sci. 2003 Jun;46(3):302-9. doi: 10.1360/03yc9032.

Effects of simulated microgravity on nitric oxide level in cardiac myocytes and 
its mechanism.

Xiong J(1)
 Li Y, Nie J.
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Space Cellular and Molecular Biology, Institute of Space 
Medico-engineering, 100094, Beijing, China.
The depression of cardiac contractility induced by space microgravity is an 
important issue of aerospace medicine research, while its precise mechanism is 
still unknown.
In the present study, we explored effects of simulated 
microgravity on nitric oxide (NO) level, inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) 
expression and related regulative mechanism using electron spin resonance (ESR) 
spectroscopy, immunocytochemistry and in situ hybridization.
We found a 
remarkable increase of NO level and up-regulation of iNOS and iNOS mRNA 
expression in rat cardiac myocytes under simulated microgravity.
Staurosporine 
(a nonselective protein kinase inhibitor), calphostin C (a selective protein 
kinase C inhibitor), partially inhibited the effect of simulated microgravity.
Thus regulative effect of simulated microgravity on iNOS expression is mediated 
at least partially via activation of protein kinase C. These results indicate 
that NO system in cardiac myocytes is sensitive to simulated microgravity and 
may play an important role in the depression of cardiac contractility induced by 
simulated microgravity.
DOI: 10.1360/03yc9032
PMID: 18763145
Imidazole inhibits a temperature-dependent component of mammalian skeletal muscle action potential 1. Nature. 1980 Jan 31;283(5746):485-6. doi: 10.1038/283485a0.

Imidazole inhibits a temperature-dependent component of mammalial skeletal 
muscle action potential.

Cheung DW
 Daniel EE.
Temperature-dependent transition of conductance in ionic channels has been 
described in several membrane systems.
We report here an abrupt change in the 
maximal rate of rise of the action potentials of the rat extensor digitorum 
longus (EDL) at 32 degrees C, indicating alteration in the functional 
characteristics of the sodium channels.
Tetrodotoxin (TTX) and imidazole were 
used to investigate further the change in properties of the sodium channels with 
respect to temperature.
TTX is known for its specificity in blocking sodium 
channels.
It has been proposed that the guanidinium group of the TTX molecule is 
essential for its activity.
Other guanidinium compounds have also been shown to 
be effective in blocking the sodium channels.
In this study, imidazole, a 
compound structurally similar to guanidine, was also tested.
We find that TTX 
and imidazole affect the maximal rate of rise of the action potential in a 
temperature-dependent manner.
DOI: 10.1038/283485a0
PMID: 7352030 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Knockout mice in understanding the mechanism of action of lithium <jats:p>Lithium inhibits IMPase (inositol monophosphatase) activity
 as well as inositol transporter function.
To determine whether one or more of these mechanisms might underlie lithium's behavioural effects, we studied Impa1 (encoding IMPase) and Smit1 (sodium–myo-inositol transporter 1)-knockout mice.
In brains of adult homozygous Impa1-knockout mice, IMPase activity was found to be decreased; however, inositol levels were not found to be altered.
Behavioural analysis indicated decreased immobility in the forced-swim test as well as a strongly increased sensitivity to pilocarpine-induced seizures.
These are behaviours robustly induced by lithium.
In homozygous Smit1-knockout mice, free inositol levels were decreased in the frontal cortex and hippocampus.
These animals behave like lithium-treated animals in the model of pilocarpine seizures and in the Porsolt forced-swim test model of depression.
In contrast with O'Brien et al.
[O'Brien, Harper, Jove, Woodgett, Maretto, Piccolo and Klein (2004) J. Neurosci.
24, 6791–6798], we could not confirm that heterozygous Gsk3b (glycogen synthase kinase 3β)-knockout mice exhibit decreased immobility in the Porsolt forced-swim test or decreased amphetamine-induced hyperactivity in a manner mimicking lithium's behavioural effects.
These data support the role of inositol-related processes rather than GSK3β in the mechanism of the therapeutic action of lithium.</jats:p>
Factors involved in the down-regulation of cytochrome P450 during Listeria monocytogenes infection 1. Int J Immunopharmacol. 1994 Sep;16(9):747-54. doi:
10.1016/0192-0561(94)90094-9.

Factors involved in the down-regulation of cytochrome P450 during Listeria 
monocytogenes infection.

Armstrong SG(1)
 Renton KW.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Dalhousie University, Halifax, Nova Scotia, 
Canada.
The activation of host defense mechanisms has been shown to cause a depression 
in hepatic cytochrome P450-mediated metabolism in rodents and humans.
In a 
previous study, it was demonstrated that the Gram-positive bacteria Listeria 
monocytogenes causes a down-regulation of hepatic cytochrome P450 and related 
substrate metabolism as a result of a pretranslational depression of apoprotein 
synthesis.
The objectives of this study were to determine whether the effect of 
listeria on hepatocyte cytochrome P450 involves hepatic nonparenchymal cells and 
whether the hemolysin, secreted only by hemolytic forms of the bacteria, plays 
any part in mediating this effect.
Total cytochrome P450 levels as well as 
ethoxyresorufin-O-dealkylase (EROD) and benzyloxyresorufin-O-dealkylase (BROD) 
activities were significantly reduced in hepatic microsomes isolated from mice 
infected in vivo for 48 h with 15U listeria, whereas the same dose of the 
avirulent non-hemolytic M3D strain had no effect.
Listeria (15U) significantly 
depressed hepatocyte EROD and BROD activities after 24 h incubations with liver 
cell cultures containing hepatocytes and nonparenchymal cells, as the result of 
both a direct effect on the hepatocyte and an interaction of listeria with 
hepatic nonparenchymal cells.
The M3D strain of listeria had no effect on 
cytochrome P-450-mediated metabolism in isolated cells, confirming that 
hemolysin is an essential component of the mechanism responsible for the 
down-regulation of cytochrome P450 during listeria infections.
DOI: 10.1016/0192-0561(94)90094-9
PMID: 7806432 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Morphine sulfate depression of cardiac function is attenuated by opiate receptor antagonism with naloxone. 1. Circ Shock. 1987;23(3):189-95.

Morphine sulfate depression of cardiac function is attenuated by opiate receptor 
antagonism with naloxone.

Vargish T(1)
 Beamer KC, Daly T, Riggs TR.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, West Virginia University, School of Medicine, 
Morgantown 26506.
In previous work, morphine sulfate was shown to decrease heart rate (HR) and 
cardiac output (CO) in a dose-related fashion.
It was hypothesized that this 
effect was mediated by opiate receptors located in the myocardium.
The present 
study evaluated the effect of opiate receptor antagonism with naloxone using a 
modified Langendorff rat heart perfusion apparatus.
Sixty-five rat hearts were 
excised and perfused with Krebs-Henseleit buffer (KHB) solution, to which 
morphine sulfate and naloxone (NAL) were added in different concentrations.
In 
the initial studies, NAL (10(-5) M) was added to the perfusate prior to the 
incremental additions of morphine.
This resulted in no antagonism of the 
previously described opiate agonist effects.
Norepinephrine (NE; 10(-9) M) was 
then added to the perfusate prior to the NAL or morphine.
The NE did not affect 
the dose-related decrease in HR and CO when morphine was added but did permit 
the attenuation of the morphine effect by the addition of increasing 
concentrations of NAL up to 10(-5) M. These results suggest that the agonist 
effect can be attenuated by opiate receptor antagonism with NAL; the data also 
suggest a possible interrelationship between opiate and catecholamine receptor 
activity in the myocardium.
PMID: 2827907 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Reserpine
 Desipramine and Phenytoin on Digoxin Induced Arrhythmias and Myocardial Uptake of Digoxin in Guinea Pigs <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> Digoxin was infused intravenously 27.5 μg/min.
to guinea pigs.
By means of the ECG doses of digoxin needed to cause ventricular extrasystoles (VES), ventricular fibrillation (VF), and asystole (AS) were determined in a control group without any premedication.
Three groups were given a pre‐treatment with desipramine, phenytoin and reserpine.
After AS digoxin concentrations in the heart muscle and in the kidneys were determined by radioimmunoassay.
The concentrations of adrenaline and noradrenaline were also determined in these tissues.
After reserpine and phenytoin the doses of digoxin needed to induce VF and AS were increased.
Desipramine had no effect on digitalis‐induced arrhythmias.
The relative uptake of digoxin in the heart muscle was decreased after all of the three premedications; there was no change in the kidney.
The tissue catecholamine concentrations were decreased after reserpine and desipramine, but remained unchanged after phenytoin.
The lethal dose of digoxin seemed not to correlate to the myocardial digoxin concentration after different premedications.
The mechanism of the uptake in the heart muscle seemed to be different from that in the kidney.
There was no correlation between the catecholamine concentration in myocardium and the ar‐rhythmogenic effect of digoxin in the different groups.</jats:p>
Synthesis of 7-amino-3a
4-dihydro-3H-[1]benzopyrano[4,3-c]isoxazole derivatives displaying combined α2-adrenoceptor antagonistic and 5-HT reuptake inhibiting activities 1.
Bioorg Med Chem.
2006 Jul 1;14(13):4361-72. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2006.02.043.
Epub  2006 Mar 15.
Synthesis of 7-amino-3a,4-dihydro-3H-[1]benzopyrano[4,3-c]isoxazole derivatives 
displaying combined alpha2-adrenoceptor antagonistic and 5-HT reuptake 
inhibiting activities.
Andrés JI(1), Alcázar J, Alonso JM, De Lucas AI, Iturrino L, Biesmans I, Megens 
AA.
Author information:
(1)Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Division of 
Janssen-Cilag, Medicinal Chemistry Department, Toledo, Spain.
iandres@prdes.jnj.com

Following a program searching for dual 5-HT reuptake inhibitors and 
alpha(2)-adrenoceptor antagonists started at Johnson & Johnson Pharmaceutical 
Research & Development, we now report on the synthesis of a series of 
7-amino-3a,4-dihydro-3H-[1]benzopyrano[4,3-c]isoxazole derivatives, some of 
which proved to be the most potent alpha(2)-adrenoceptor blockers within this 
chemical class of tricyclic isoxazolines, while keeping potent 5-HT reuptake 
inhibiting activity.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2006.02.043
PMID: 16540335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Galanin enhances and a galanin antagonist attenuates depression-like behaviour in the rat 1. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2007 Jan;17(1):64-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2006.03.003. Epub 2006 Apr 19.

Galanin enhances and a galanin antagonist attenuates depression-like behaviour 
in the rat.

Kuteeva E(1)
 Wardi T, Hökfelt T, Ogren SO.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet, Retzius väg.
8, S-171 77 
Stockholm, Sweden.
The effect of intracerebroventricular infusion of galanin and/or the galanin 
antagonist M35 was studied in the forced swim test.
Animals were pre-exposed to 
water for 15 min 24 h prior to test.
Immobility and climbing were assessed 
during the second, 5 min exposure to water.
Rats receiving a single infusion of 
galanin (3 nmol) displayed a significant increase of immobility.
This effect was 
blocked by co-administration of M35 (1 nmol).
M35 alone (1 nmol) produced a 
significant decrease of immobility.
The results further support the hypothesis 
that galanin may play a role in mood disorders, and that galanin antagonists may 
represent new candidates for antidepressant treatment.
DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2006.03.003
PMID: 16624535 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Functional Domains in Dorsal Striatum of the Nonhuman Primate Are Defined by the Dynamic Behavior of Dopamine 1. J Neurosci. 2002 Jul 1;22(13):5705-12. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-13-05705.2002.

Functional domains in dorsal striatum of the nonhuman primate are defined by the 
dynamic behavior of dopamine.

Cragg SJ(1)
 Hille CJ, Greenfield SA.
Author information:
(1)University Department of Pharmacology, Oxford OX1 3QT, United Kingdom.
stephanie.cragg@pharm.ox.ac.uk

The dorsal striatum comprises a continuum of distinct functional domains, 
limbic, associative, and sensorimotor.
In the primate it exclusively subdivides 
further into two nuclei, the putamen and caudate.
Dopamine (DA) transmission is 
differentially affected between these nuclei in neurodegenerative diseases such 
as Parkinson's and by psychostimulants such as cocaine.
Because rodent systems 
can offer only limited insight into DA systems of the human brain, a fuller 
appreciation of DA transmission and its role in dysfunction requires direct 
study in primates.
DA behavior was explored in the major functional domains of 
the caudate nucleus and compared with the putamen, using fast-scan cyclic 
voltammetry in striatal sections from the marmoset (Callithrix jacchus).
There 
was domain-specific variation in extracellular DA transients [i.e., 
concentration ([DA](o)) released by a single stimulus and the rate maximum of DA 
uptake, V(max)].
Across nuclei, functional rather than anatomical regions were 
differentiated by these dynamics.
The largest, fastest DA transients were at 
motor-associated loci.
Evoked [DA](o) at physiological frequencies was 
differently frequency-sensitive between functional domains but not between 
anatomical nuclei.
In contrast, presynaptic depression was not an index of 
regional differentiation, recovering with similar kinetics at all loci.
Within a 
given functional domain of dorsal striatum, the dynamics of DA release and 
uptake are similar for the putamen and the caudate nucleus.
Conversely, distinct 
functional domains are defined by these DA dynamics, in a manner more marked in 
primates than in rodents.
These data from the primate brain highlight 
differences in DA availability that may be central to DA function and 
dysfunction in the human.
DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.22-13-05705.2002
PMCID: PMC6758186
PMID: 12097522 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
INCREASING PERCENT BURN IS CORRELATED WITH INCREASING INFLAMMATION IN AN ADULT RODENT MODEL 1. Shock. 2008 Oct;30(4):388-93. doi: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e318164f1cd.

Increasing percent burn is correlated with increasing inflammation in an adult 
rodent model.

Barber RC(1)
 Maass DL, White DJ, Horton JW.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, UT Southwestern Medical Center, Dallas, Texas 
75390-9160, USA.
robert.barber@utsouthwestern.edu

Burn injury has been associated with systemic/compartmental inflammatory 
responses and myocardial dysfunction.
We hypothesized that burn size correlates 
with the extent of cardiac inflammatory response/contractile dysfunction.
Adult 
male Sprague-Dawley rats were divided to receive anesthesia, a 3-degree burn 
covering 20%, 30%, 40%, or 60% total body surface area (TBSA) plus fluid 
resuscitation (lactated Ringer, 4 mL/kg per percent burn); sham burn animals 
were included as controls.
There were seven rats in each group.
Rats were 
euthanized Twenty-four h postburn, and TNF-alpha, IL-1beta, and IL-6 were 
measured in the plasma and in supernatant from isolated cardiac myocytes by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
In addition, left ventricular function 
(Langendorff) was studied in vitro, and troponin levels were measured by 
enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay.
There were progressive, statistically 
significant increases in plasma and myocyte inflammatory cytokine levels, as 
well as plasma troponin with increasing burn size.
Similarly, left ventricular 
pressure (in millimeters of mercury) and +/-dP/dtmax (in millimeters of mercury 
per second) progressively fell with increasing burn size.
However, myocardial 
contractile depression induced by 60% TBSA burn was similar to that produced by 
40% TBSA burn.
These data suggest that the degree of inflammatory response, 
cardiac tissue injury, and myocardial contractile depression were correlated 
directly with the percent TBSA burn.
However, unlike inflammation and cardiac 
tissue damage, myocardial contractile depression reached a plateau, with maximal 
myocardial contraction and relaxation defects observed at 40% TBSA burn, which 
were not further aggravated by a larger (60%) burn.
DOI: 10.1097/SHK.0b013e318164f1cd
PMID: 18277951 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Effect of Nipradilol on the Isoproterenol-Induced Depression of Contractions in the Cat Soleus Muscle 1. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1999 Nov;81(3):286-91. doi: 10.1254/jjp.81.286.

The effect of nipradilol on the isoproterenol-induced depression of contractions 
in the cat soleus muscle.

Tanaka T(1)
 Murata N, Yamauchi Y.
Author information:
(1)Gifu Research Laboratory, JBC Inc., Kaizu-gun, Japan.
The effect of nipradilol on the isoproterelol-induced depression of contractions 
of the soleus muscle of the anesthetized cats was studied.
Isoproterenol (0.3 
microg/kg) injected intravenously decreased the tension and degree of fusion of 
incomplete tetanic contractions of the soleus muscle of the anesthetized cats.
The effect of isoproterenol was blocked by nipradilol (> or = 3 microg/kg), 
desnitro-nipradilol (> or = 10 microg/kg) and propranolol (> or = 10 microg/kg), 
but not by nitroglycerin (10-100 microg/kg).
Nipradilol (30 microg/kg) and 
desnitronipradilol (300 microg/kg) almost completely antagonized the depressor 
effects of isoproterenol.
These results coupled with evidence that nipradilol 
does not penetrate the blood-brain barrier indicate that nipradilol exerts an 
anti-tremor action by blocking peripheral beta2-adrenoceptors.
DOI: 10.1254/jjp.81.286
PMID: 10622217 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Acute experimental changes in mood state regulate immune function in relation to central opioid neurotransmission: a model of human CNS-peripheral inflammatory interaction 1. Mol Psychiatry. 2016 Feb;21(2):243-51. doi: 10.1038/mp.2015.110. Epub 2015 Aug
 18.

Acute experimental changes in mood state regulate immune function in relation to 
central opioid neurotransmission: a model of human CNS-peripheral inflammatory 
interaction.

Prossin AR(1)
 Koch AE(2)(3), Campbell PL(2), Barichello T(4)(5), Zalcman SS(6), 
Zubieta JK(7)(8)(9).
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas Health 
Science Center at Houston, Houston, TX, USA.
(2)Division of Rheumatology, Department of Internal Medicine, University of 
Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(3)Medical Service, Veteran's Administration Ann Arbor, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(4)Center for Experimental Models in Psychiatry, Department of Psychiatry and 
Behavioral Sciences, University of Texas Health Science Center at Houston, 
Houston, TX, USA.
(5)Laboratório de Microbiologia Experimental, Programa de Pós-Graduação em 
Ciências da Saúde, Unidade Acadêmica de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade do 
Extremo Sul Catarinense, Criciúma, SC, Brazil.
(6)Department of Psychiatry, New Jersey Medical School, University of Medicine 
and Dentistry of New Jersey, Newark, NJ, USA.
(7)Department of Psychiatry, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
(8)Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute, Department of Psychiatry, 
University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
(9)Department of Radiology, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor, 
MI, USA.
Although evidence shows depressed moods enhance risk for somatic diseases, 
molecular mechanisms underlying enhanced somatic susceptibility are ill-defined.
Knowledge of these molecular mechanisms will inform development of treatment and 
prevention strategies across comorbid depressive and somatic illnesses.
Existing 
evidence suggests that interleukin-18 (IL-18; an IL-1 family cytokine) is 
elevated in depression and implicated in pathophysiology underlying comorbid 
medical illnesses.
We previously identified strong associations between baseline 
IL-18 and μ-opioid receptor availability in major depressive disorder (MDD) 
volunteers.
Combined with the evidence in animal models, we hypothesized that 
experimental mood induction would change IL-18, the extent proportional to 
opioid neurotransmitter release.
Using the Velten technique in a 
[(11)C]carfentanil positron emission tomography neuroimaging study, we examined 
the impact of experimentally induced mood (sad, neutral) on plasma IL-18 and 
relationships with concurrent changes in the central opioid neurotransmission in 
28 volunteers (healthy, MDD).
Results showed mood induction impacted IL-18 
(F2,25=12.2, P<0.001), sadness increasing IL-18 (T27=2.6, P=0.01) and neutral 
mood reducing IL-18 (T27=-4.1, P<0.001).
In depressed volunteers, changes in 
IL-18 were more pronounced (F2,25=3.6, P=0.03) and linearly proportional to 
sadness-induced μ-opioid activation (left ventral pallidum, bilateral anterior 
cingulate cortices, right hypothalamus and bilateral amygdala).
These data 
demonstrate that dynamic changes of a pro-inflammatory IL-1 superfamily 
cytokine, IL-18, and its relationship to μ-opioid neurotransmission in response 
to experimentally induced sadness.
Further testing is warranted to delineate the 
role of neuroimmune interactions involving IL-18 in enhancing susceptibility to 
medical illness (that is, diabetes, heart disease and persistent pain states) in 
depressed individuals.
DOI: 10.1038/mp.2015.110
PMCID: PMC4720915
PMID: 26283642 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: AEK has recently been employed by Eli Lilly 
companies and has consulted for Metastatix, Pennside Partners, Cypress 
Bioscience, Takeda Pharmaceuticals, NiCox SA, Celtaxsys, Gerson Lehrman Group of 
Healthcare and Biomedical Advisors, Guidepoint Global, UCB Pharmaceuticals and 
the Fund for Autoimmune Research and has been an expert for Kirkland and Ellis.
AEK has received investigator-initiated research grants for Bristol-Myers 
Squibb, Roche, and Takeda Pharmaceuticals.
The remaining authors declare no 
conflict of interest.
[Unpredictable chronic mild stress effects on antidepressants activities in forced swim test]. 1. Ross Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova. 2015 Feb;101(2):163-70.

[Unpredictable chronic mild stress effects on antidepressants activities in 
forced swim test].

[Article in Russian]

Kudryashov NV
 Kalinina TS, Voronina TA.
The experiments has been designed to study unpredictable chronic mild stress 
effect on anti-depressive activities of amitriptyline (10 mg/kg) and fluoxetine 
(20 mg/kg) in forced swim test in male outbred mice.
It is shown that acute 
treatment with fluoxetine does not produce any antidepressant effects in mice 
following stress of 14 days while the sub-chronic injections of fluoxetine 
result in more deep depressive-like behavior.
In 28 daily stressed mice, 
antidepressant effect of fluoxetine is observed independently of the injection 
rates.
Amitriptyline demonstrates the antidepressant activity regardless of the 
duration of stress or administration scheduling, but at the same time the 
severity of anti-immobilization effect of amitriptyline in stressed mice is 
weaker in compare to non-stressed trails.
Thus, the injection rates and duration 
of unpredictable mild chronic stress are the parameters that determine the 
efficiency of antidepressants in the mouse forced swimming test.
PMID: 26012108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of ethanol in antenatal exposure on the early stages of progeny development]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1982 Nov-Dec;45(6):68-71.

[Effect of ethanol in antenatal exposure on the early stages of progeny 
development].

[Article in Russian]

Smol'nikova NM
 Strekalova SN.
PMID: 7152006 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of spontaneous
 assisted, and controlled ventilatory modes in halothane-anesthetized geldings.
1.
Am J Vet Res.
1986 May;47(5):992-6.
Effects of spontaneous, assisted, and controlled ventilatory modes in 
halothane-anesthetized geldings.
Hodgson DS, Steffey EP, Grandy JL, Woliner MJ.
Cardiopulmonary effects of spontaneous, assisted, and controlled ventilatory 
modes were determined with 6 young, healthy geldings anesthetized with halothane 
at a constant dose (1.3 minimum alveolar concentration).
All horses were in 
lateral recumbency, and all modes of ventilation were studied at least once 
during each anesthetic exposure.
Cardiac output did not differ between 
spontaneous and assisted ventilation modes, but both modes were associated with 
significantly (P less than 0.05) higher cardiac output than that with controlled 
ventilation.
The PaCO2 differed significantly (P less than 0.01) between all 
modes of ventilation.
Although controlled ventilation maintained a normal PaCO2, 
assisted ventilation reduced PaCO2 as compared with spontaneous ventilation with 
less cardiovascular depression than that with controlled ventilation.
Mixed 
venous O2 tensions were higher with spontaneous and assisted ventilation modes 
than with controlled ventilation.
Except for shorter inspiratory time and 
smaller inspiratory/expiratory ratio associated with spontaneous ventilation, 
there were no ventilatory mode-related effects on ventilatory variables.
PMID: 3717746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dopamine D-2 receptor agonist-induced behavioural depression: critical dependence upon postsynaptic dopamine D-1 function 1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1989 Oct;340(4):355-65. doi: 
10.1007/BF00167035.

Dopamine D-2 receptor agonist-induced behavioural depression: critical 
dependence upon postsynaptic dopamine D-1 function. A behavioural and 
biochemical study.

Jackson DM(1)
 Ross SB, Larsson LG.
Author information:
(1)Astra Research Centre, Södertälje, Sweden.
The dopamine (DA) D-2 receptor agonists quinpirole (threshold dose, 0.01 mg/kg 
IP), pergolide (0.025 mg/kg), B-HT 920 (0.003 mg/kg) and (-)-3-PPP (4 mg/kg) 
produced dose-dependent locomotor depression (immobility) in mice as assessed by 
a subjective scoring system, with the immobility being characterized by a frozen 
posture.
The animals were still but had their eyes open.
The immobility was 
accompanied by reductions in sniffing, rearing and grooming.
The depression (and 
the associated reduction in the various behaviours) produced by quinpirole (0.1 
mg/kg), pergolide (0.1 mg/kg) and B-HT 920 (0.1 mg/kg) was substantially (but 
not always completely) reversed by the selective D-1 receptor agonist SKF38393 
(up to 12 mg/kg) and the non-selective D-1 receptor agonist CY208243 (up to 3 
mg/kg).
The immobility induced by (-)-3-PPP (16 mg/kg) was also reversed by 
CY208243 and SKF38393, but the reversal was due to an increase in grooming 
behaviour in mice challenged with the D-1 receptor agonists, whether or not the 
animals had also received (-)-3-PPP.
There was no reversal of the depression of 
rearing or sniffing.
In contrast, CY208243 and SKF38393 also antagonized the 
immobility induced by B-HT 920, but the reversal was accompanied by at least 
partial reversals of the depression of sniffing, rearing and grooming.
The 
reversal of quinpirole-induced immobility by SKF38393 and CY208243 was 
antagonized by SCH23390 (0.1 mg/kg).
The selective D-2 receptor antagonist 
raclopride (0.025 to 0.4 mg/kg) could not reverse quinpirole-induced immobility.
High doses of either raclopride (0.4 mg/kg) or SCH23390 (greater than 0.1 mg/kg) 
significantly increased immobility.
Although raclopride itself (0.2 mg/kg) 
produced a substantial increase in DOPAC and homovanillic acid (HVA) levels in 
the striatum, it did not antagonize the autoreceptor mediated effects of 
quinpirole (0.1 mg/kg) in reducing the striatal dihydroxyphenylacetic acid 
(DOPAC) to DA ratio.
However, the same dose of raclopride was partly effective 
in reducing the effects of lower doses of quinpirole (0.01 and 0.03 mg/kg) on 
the striatal DOPAC to DA ratio.
Raclopride (0.2 mg/kg) also partially but 
significantly reduced the locomotor stimulant effects of d-amphetamine in 
reserpinized mice.
Biochemical analyses in the striata indicated that CY208243 
slightly retarded DA turnover (as assessed by the DOPAC/DA ratio).
SKF38393 
itself also slightly reduced DA turnover.
In automated activity cages, using 
mice depleted of DA with reserpine and alpha-methyltyrosine, all the D-2 
receptor agonists tested, in combination with SKF38393, produced an increase in 
activity.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1007/BF00167035
PMID: 2573842 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pathogenesis of Rinderpest Virus Infection in Rabbits II. Effect of Rinderpest Virus on the Immune Functions of Rabbits <jats:p>Rinderpest virus infection was shown to induce marked suppression of both humoral antibody response and cell-mediated immunity in rabbits. The virus exhibited a suppressive effect on primary antibody response as indicated by a decrease in numbers of plaque-forming cells (immunoglobulin [Ig]M) and hemagglutinating antibody titers of both IgM and IgG types to sheep red blood cells
 whereas there was no detectable effect of the virus on the production of memory cells.
Virus-induced suppression of cell-mediated immunity was demonstrated by a decreased rate of proliferative response of peripheral lymphocytes to phytohemagglutinin stimulus and by a depression of delayed-type skin reactions to purified protein derivative.
Such suppressive effects were indicated to persist for 14 days or longer.
Alteration in phagocytic activity of the reticuloendothelial system was not observed.
The relevance of the virus-induced histological lesions in the lymphoid tissues to the virus-induced immunosuppression was discussed.</jats:p>
[Effects of kaixinsan on behavior and expression of p-CREB in hippocampus of chronic stress rats]. 1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2007 Aug;32(15):1555-8.

[Effects of kaixinsan on behavior and expression of p-CREB in hippocampus of 
chronic stress rats].

[Article in Chinese]

Wang JL(1)
 Liu P, Tu HH, Wang ZX, Chen GY.
Author information:
(1)Dept.
of Clinical Pharmacology, General Hospital of PLA, Beijing 100853, 
China.
OBJECTIVE: To study the effects of kaixinsan on behavior and expression of 
p-CREB in hippocampus of the chronic stress rats.
METHOD: The male Wistar rats which gained the similar scores by Open-field test 
were selected, then the depression model rat was produced by separation and 
chronic unpredictable mild stress.
Open-field test was performed to detect the 
behavior of rats and immunohistochemistry was used to observe the changes of 
p-CREB expression in hippocampus.
RESULT: On the 22nd day, the body weight and sacchar-intake of the depression 
model rats were all lower than those of the normal rats and the body weight and 
sacchar-intake of the rats treated by drugs were higher compared with model rats 
(P < 0.01).
The depressive behavior in kaixinsan 4 g x kg(-1) group was 
significantly improved compared with the model group, the crossing scores and 
rearing scores were all increased (P < 0.01) and the expression of p-CREB in 
CA1, CA3 and DG in hippocampus was higher than that in the model group (P < 0.05 
and P < 0.01).
CONCLUSION: Kaixinsan might improve depressive behavior by increasing expression 
of p-CREB in CA1, CA3 and DG in hippocampus of the chronic stress rats.
PMID: 17972588 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
EFFECT OF OESTRADIOL BENZOATE ON PITUITARY AND TESTIS FUNCTION IN THE NORMAL ADULT MALE RAT <jats:title>ABSTRACT</jats:title>
        <jats:p>The effects of subcutaneous administration of oestradiol benzoate (EB) on the weights of sex organs and on levels of testosterone and gonadotrophins in normal adult male rats have been studied. Doses of EB varied from 0.01 to 100 μg and were administered daily for seven days. Administration of 100 μg EB resulted in suppression of pituitary LH
 while serum LH levels were already decreased after treatment with EB ≧ 1 μg.
Pituitary and serum FSH levels were suppressed after administration of 100 and 10 μg EB respectively.
Testicular tissue and serum levels of testosterone decreased after treatment with amounts of EB ≧ 1 μg.
These decreased androgen levels were also reflected in a concomitant decrease in the weights of the ventral prostate and seminal vesicles.
A decrease in the weight of the testes was obtained following a dose of EB ≧ 10 μg.</jats:p>
[Role of autoregulation of vessels in effect of neurotropic vasodilator agents]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1969 Nov-Dec;32(6):673-8.

[Role of autoregulation of vessels in effect of neurotropic vasodilator agents].

[Article in Russian]

Kisin IE
 Serebriakov LA.
PMID: 4392694 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cholinergic mediation of motor effects of ethanol in rats 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1979 Apr 1;55(1):67-72. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(79)90148-1.

Cholinergic mediation of motor effects of ethanol in rats.

Pohorecky LA
 Makowski E, Newman B, Rassi E.

The role of cholinergic neurons in the motor depressant effects of ethanol was 
examined.
Choline chloride pretreatment (30-90 mg/kg i.p.)
potentiated the 
hypomotility produced by 2 g/kg of ethanol.
Physostigmine pretreatment (0.2 
mg/kg i.p.)
also enhanced the motor depression produced by ethanol.
Conversely, 
in animals pretreated with scopolamine (0.25 and 0.5 mg/kg) the depressant 
effect of ethanol was less.
The potentiation produced by choline was not 
associated with changes in levels of ethanol in blood.
It is concluded that 
cholinergic neurons are involved in the motor activity changes produced by 
ethanol.
Such a mechanism may operate in conjunction with the dopaminergic 
neuronal system.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(79)90148-1
PMID: 436943 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Impact of substance P receptor antagonism on the serotonin and norepinephrine systems: relevance to the antidepressant/anxiolytic response. 1. J Psychiatry Neurosci. 2004 May;29(3):208-18.

Impact of substance P receptor antagonism on the serotonin and norepinephrine 
systems: relevance to the antidepressant/anxiolytic response.

Blier P(1)
 Gobbi G, Haddjeri N, Santarelli L, Mathew G, Hen R.

Author information:
(1)University of Ottawa Institute of Mental Health Research, Ottawa, ON.
pblier@rohcg.on.ca

Substance P (neurokinin-1 [NK1]) receptor antagonists appear to be effective 
antidepressant and anxiolytic agents, as indicated in 3 double-blind clinical 
trials.
In laboratory animals, they promptly attenuate the responsiveness of 
serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine [5-HT]) and norepinephrine (NE) neurons to 
agonists of their cell-body autoreceptors, as is the case for some 
antidepressant drugs that are currently in clinical use.
Long-term, but not 
subacute, antagonism of NK1 receptors in rats increases 5-HT transmission in the 
hippocampus, a property common to all antidepressant treatments tested thus far.
This enhancement seems to be mediated by a time-dependent increase in the firing 
rate of 5-HT neurons.
Mice with the NK1 receptor deleted from their genetic code 
also have an increased firing rate of 5-HT neurons.
Taken together, these 
observations strongly suggest that NK1 antagonists could become a new class of 
antidepressant and anxiolytic agents.
Les antagonistes des récepteurs de la substance P (neurokinine-1 [NK1]) semblent 
efficaces comme antidépresseurs et anxiolytiques, ainsi que l'indiquent trois 
études cliniques à double insu.
Chez des animaux de laboratoire, ces agents 
atténuent rapidement la réponse des neurones à sérotonine (5-hydroxytryptamine 
[5-HT]) et à norépinéphrine (NE) aux agonistes de leurs autorécepteurs du corps 
cellulaire, comme dans le cas de certains antidépresseurs actuellement utilisés 
en clinique.
L'antagonisme à long terme mais non subaigu des récepteurs de la 
NK1 chez le rat accroÎt la transmission de la 5-HT dans l'hippocampe, 
caractéristique commune à tous les traitements aux antidépresseurs étudiés à ce 
jour.
Une augmentation de la fréquence de décharge des neurones de la 5-HT liée 
au temps semble intervenir dans cette élévation.
Les souris dont on a éliminé le 
récepteur de la NK1 du code génétique ont aussi une fréquence de décharge plus 
élevée des neurones de la 5-HT.
Globalement, ces observations indiquent 
fortement que les antagonistes de la NK1 pourraient devenir une nouvelle 
catégorie d'antidépresseurs et d'anxiolytiques.
PMCID: PMC400690
PMID: 15173897 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Genetic Variant BDNF (Val66Met) Polymorphism Alters Anxiety-Related Behavior <jats:p>
            A common single-nucleotide polymorphism in the brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) gene
 a methionine (Met) substitution for valine (Val) at codon 66 (Val66Met), is associated with alterations in brain anatomy and memory, but its relevance to clinical disorders is unclear.
We generated a variant BDNF mouse (BDNF
            <jats:sup>Met/Met</jats:sup>
            ) that reproduces the phenotypic hallmarks in humans with the variant allele.
BDNF
            <jats:sub>Met</jats:sub>
            was expressed in brain at normal levels, but its secretion from neurons was defective.
When placed in stressful settings, BDNF
            <jats:sup>Met/Met</jats:sup>
            mice exhibited increased anxiety-related behaviors that were not normalized by the antidepressant, fluoxetine.
A variant BDNF may thus play a key role in genetic predispositions to anxiety and depressive disorders.
</jats:p>
Inflammation modulates anxiety in an animal model of multiple sclerosis 1. Behav Brain Res. 2011 Jun 20;220(1):20-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.01.018. Epub
 2011 Jan 19.

Inflammation modulates anxiety in an animal model of multiple sclerosis.

Peruga I(1)
 Hartwig S, Thöne J, Hovemann B, Gold R, Juckel G, Linker RA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, St. Josef-Hospital, Ruhr-University Bochum, 44791 
Bochum, Germany.
Multiple sclerosis (MS) is a chronic inflammatory disease of the central nervous 
system (CNS) characterized by inflammation, but also degenerative changes.
Besides neurological deficits, the rate of affective disorders such as 
depression and anxiety is at least six fold increased.
Many aspects of MS can be 
mimicked in the animal model of myelin oligodendrocyte glycoprotein experimental 
autoimmune encephalomyelitis (MOG-EAE).
Here we investigate behavioral changes 
in C57BL/6 mice suffering from mild MOG-EAE.
In the later phase of the disease, 
mice were subjected to behavioral tests including the light-dark-box (LD Box), 
the acoustic startle response (SR) with a pre-pulse inhibition protocol as well 
as the learned helplessness (LH) paradigm.
Behavioral data were correlated with 
the motor performance in an open field and rotarod test (RR).
In the RR and open 
field, there was no significant difference in the motor performance between 
controls and mice suffering from mild MOG-EAE.
Yet EAE mice displayed an 
increased anxiety-like behavior with a 23% reduction of the time spent in the 
bright compartment of the LD Box as well as an increased SR.
In the LH paradigm, 
mice suffering from MOG-EAE were twice as much prone to depressive-like 
behavior.
These changes correlate with an increase of hippocampal tissue tumor 
necrosis factor alpha levels and neuronal loss in the hippocampus.
Modulation of 
monoaminergic transmission by chronic application of the antidepressant 
amitriptyline resulted in a decreased startle reaction and increased hippocampal 
norepinephrine levels.
These data imply that chronic inflammation in the CNS may 
impact on emotional responses in rodent models of anxiety.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2011.01.018
PMID: 21255614 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Regulation of the galanin system by repeated electroconvulsive seizures in mice <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Even though induction of seizures by electroconvulsive stimulation (ECS) is a treatment widely used for major depression in humans
 the working mechanism of ECS remains uncertain.
The antiepileptic effect of ECS has been suggested to be involved in mediating the therapeutic effect of ECS.
The neuropeptide galanin exerts antiepileptic and antidepressant‐like effects and has also been implicated in the pathophysiology of depression.
To explore a potential role of galanin in working mechanisms of ECS, the present study examined effects of repeated ECS on the galanin system using QRT‐PCR, in situ hybridization, and [<jats:sup>125</jats:sup>I]galanin receptor binding.
ECS was administered to adult mice daily for 14 days, and this paradigm was confirmed to exert antidepressant‐like effect in the tail suspension test.
Prominent increases in galanin gene expression were found in several brain regions involved in regulation of epileptic activity and depression, including the piriform cortex, hippocampal dentate gyrus, and amygdala.
Likewise, GalR2 gene expression was up‐regulated in both the central and the medial amygdala, whereas GalR1 gene expression showed a modest down‐regulation in the medial amygdala.
[<jats:sup>125</jats:sup>I]galanin receptor binding in the piriform cortex, hippocampus, and amygdala was found to be significantly down‐regulated.
These data show that the galanin system is regulated by repeated ECS in a number of brain regions implicated in seizure regulation and depression.
These changes may play a role in the therapeutic effect of ECS.
© 2010 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
On the process of inhibition in the superficial neuropil of the cerebral cortex. 1. Physiol Bohemoslov. 1985;34 Suppl:133-6.

On the process of inhibition in the superficial neuropil of the cerebral cortex.

Roitbak A
 Ocherashvili I, Gedevanishvili G.

Experiments were carried out on cats under Nembutal anaesthesia.
The electrodes 
were placed on the gyrus suprasylvius.
The recording macroelectrode and the 
K+--sensitive microelectrode were placed between two stimulating electrodes (S1 
and S2).
A strong stimulus applied through S1 elicited a slow surface negative 
potential (SNP) and an increase in [K/]0.
The change of K+ potential correlated 
in time with SNP but the decay of K+ potential lasted longer.
At this time 
depression of the dendritic potential (DP)--EPSP of apcial dendrites--evoked by 
stimulation through S2 took place.
The greater the negative shift and the [K/]0 
increase the greater was the depression.
Tetraethylammonium increased SNP and 
this correlated with a strong depression of DP.
Application of KCl or 
acetylcholine solutions resulted in DP depression.
It may be supposed that the 
depression of dendritic potentials expresses presynaptic inhibition in the 
cortical neuropile based on the action of K+ ions.
PMID: 2941782 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Israel Society for Neuroscience 20th Annual Meeting Hilton Queen of Sheba Eilat
 December 11–13, 2011 1.
J Mol Neurosci.
2012 Nov;48 Suppl 1:1-132. doi: 10.1007/s12031-011-9682-4.
Abstracts of the Israel Society for Neuroscience 20th Annual Meeting.
December 
11-13, 2011.
Eilat, Israel.
[No authors listed]

DOI: 10.1007/s12031-011-9682-4
PMID: 22125124 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inbreeding impact on litter size and survival in selected canine breeds 1. Vet J. 2015 Jan;203(1):74-8. doi: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2014.11.008. Epub 2014 Nov
18.

Inbreeding impact on litter size and survival in selected canine breeds.

Leroy G(1)
 Phocas F(2), Hedan B(3), Verrier E(2), Rognon X(2).
Author information:
(1)AgroParisTech, UMR 1313 Génétique Animale et Biologie Intégrative, Paris 
F-75231, France; INRA, UMR 1313 Génétique Animale et Biologie Intégrative, 
Jouy-en-Josas F-78352, France.
Electronic address: 
gregoire.leroy@agroparistech.fr.
(2)AgroParisTech, UMR 1313 Génétique Animale et Biologie Intégrative, Paris 
F-75231, France; INRA, UMR 1313 Génétique Animale et Biologie Intégrative, 
Jouy-en-Josas F-78352, France.
(3)CNRS/Université de Rennes, UMR 6061Institut de Génétique et Développement de 
Rennes, Rennes F-35065, France.
Data obtained from the French Kennel Club and the Fichier National Canin were 
used to estimate the effect of inbreeding on average litter size and survival in 
seven French breeds of dog.
Depending on the breed, litter sizes were 3.5-6.3 
puppies and longevities were 7.7-12.2 years.
Estimated heritabilities were 
6.0-10.9% for litter size and 6.1-10.1% for survival at 2 years of age.
Regression coefficients indicated a negative effect of inbreeding on both 
individual survival and litter size.
Although the impact of baseline inbreeding 
within breeds appears to be limited, the improper mating of close relatives will 
reduce biological fitness through significant reduction of litter size and 
longevity.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.tvjl.2014.11.008
PMID: 25475165 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Participation of the microsomal electron transport system involving cytochrome P-450 in ω-oxidation of fatty acids 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1968 Nov 26;162(4):518-24. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2728(68)90058-3.

Participation of the microsomal electron transport system involving cytochrome 
P-450 in omega-oxidation of fatty acids.

Wada F
 Shibata H, Goto M, Sakamoto Y.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2728(68)90058-3
PMID: 4387274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Biochemical pathology of lung damage produced by chemicals. 1. Fed Proc. 1976 Jan;35(1):89-94.

Biochemical pathology of lung damage produced by chemicals.

Witschi H
 Côté MG.

Damage to the lung may be caused by chemicals that gain access to the alveolar 
zone by inhalation or via the pulmonary circulation.
Several agents toxic to the 
lung have recently been found to bind covalently to pulmonary macromolecules or 
to disrupt certain metabolic reactions.
However, it has also been observed that 
extensive chemical lung injury is not necessarily preceded by a depression of 
pulmonary metabolic reactions.
One possible explanation for this might be that 
biochemical changes due to cell death are often masked and/or compensated for by 
changes associated with lung tissue repair.
Substantial cell proliferation as a 
response to toxic lung damage is a common phenomenon in lung pathology.
This 
makes it necessary to develop models that permit analysis of the biochemical 
events triggering and accompanying cell growth in lung.
We have recently 
examined some aspects of cell proliferation in mouse lung.
Intraperitoneal 
injection of the antioxidant butylated hydroxytoluene (BHT) produces within 3-5 
days extensive hypertrophy, hyperplasia, and general disorganization of the 
cellular components of the lung.
Total lung weight and total DNA per lung almost 
double within this time and are accompanied by proportional increases in protein 
and lipids.
RNA accumulates at a faster rate than DNA.
The changes in lung 
composition are accompanied by dose-dependent increases in the in vivo 
incorporation of thymidine into DNA and of leucine into protein.
The activities 
of several enzymes (thymidine kinase, DNA polymerase, uridine kinase, 
glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, and 5'-nucleotidase) increase substantially 
after BHT.
Administration of BHT to mice seems to offer a convenient tool to 
study cell growth in the lungs of mice.
PMID: 1245236 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
An interaction between the pineal gland and olfactory deprivation in potentiating the effects of melatonin on gonads
 accessory sex organs, and prolactin in male rats <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Male rats (25–26 days of age) housed with 14 hours of light per day (lights on 0600–2000 hours) were either olfactory bulbectomized (rendering them anosmic), bulbectomized plus pinealectomized (Pinx), or left intact.
On the day following the operations, intact, anosmic, and anosmic‐Pinx animals began receiving single, daily afternoon (1700–1800 hours) subcutaneous injections of 50 μg of melatonin (MEL) for six weeks, while an additional group of intact controls received injections of diluent.
At the end of this period, body, anterior pituitary, testicular, and seminal vesicle weights were significantly reduced in intact‐MEL‐treated animals.
Anosmic animals that had been treated with MEL experienced a further, highly significant, 65%, 90%, and 85% depression in testicular, seminal vesicle, and ventral prostate weights, respectively, as compared with intact control and MEL‐treated rats.
Additionally, both body and anterior pituitary weights were significantly decreased in MEL‐treated, anosmic rats.
Anosmic‐Pinx rats treated with MEL had organ and body weights that were intermediate between those of intact‐MEL and anosmic‐MEL‐treated animals.
Pituitary and serum levels of prolactin (Prl) were significantly lower in anosmic‐MEL‐treated rats than in intact or intact‐MEL‐treated groups.
Similarly, Prl levels were depressed in the anosmic‐Pinx rats treated with MEL; however, serum Prl was not statistically lower than in intact or intact‐MEL‐treated animals.
These results indicate that anosmic male rats have an increased sensitivity to antigonadotrophic and Prl‐inhibitory effects of MEL.
Furthermore, the data suggest that the presence of the pineal gland in anosmic rats is important in permitting anosmia maximally to sensitize the neuroendocrine‐reproductive axis to the antigonadotrophic effects of exogenously administered MEL.</jats:p>
A Male-Biased Natal Sex-Ratio in Inbred Collared Lemmings
 Dicrostonyx Groenlandicus 1.
Hereditas.
1995;123(1):31-7. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-5223.1995.00031.x.
A male-biased natal sex-ratio in inbred collared lemmings, Dicrostonyx 
groenlandicus.
Jarrell GH(1).
Author information:
(1)University of Alaska Museum, Fairbanks 99775-6960, USA.
Comment in
    Hereditas.
1998;128(2):185-8. doi: 10.1111/j.1601-5223.1998.00185.x.
A captive colony of collared lemmings (Dicrostonyx groenlandicus) from northern 
Alaska produced a male-biased sex ratio of 67% males for about three 
generations.
These lemmings have a pair of autosomes fused to the sex 
chromosomes.
Thus, males have two copies of some (formerly autosomal) sex-linked 
genes: One set is X-linked; the other can be described as Y-linked.
Given such a 
karyotype, deleterious recessive alleles on the autosomal portion of the X 
chromosome are more resistant to selection than truly autosomal loci because 
they can be eliminated by homozygosity only in females.
The male-bias could have 
resulted from one or more lethals carried on the formerly autosomal arm of the X 
chromosome.
As inbreeding coefficients approached 0.3, the lethal was apparently 
homozygous in half of the homogametic (female) zygotes.
This phenomenon may 
explain the excess of males and XY females attributed to meiotic drive in 
Dicrostonyx torquatus from Siberia.
If under the natural mating system, 
inbreeding depression limits fitness, then fusion of autosomal chromatin to the 
sex chromosomes could be an adaptation to reduce inbreeding depression in 
heterogametic individuals.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1601-5223.1995.00031.x
PMID: 8598343 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Control of interval‐force relation in canine ventricular myocardium studied with ryanodine <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The mechanism of post‐extrasystolic
 rest and frequency potentiation was studied in canine isolated ventricular muscle.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Ryanodine, which impairs Ca availability from the sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR), reduced the amplitude of the extrasystole less than that of the steady state contraction.
Ryanodine also inhibited post‐extrasystolic potentiation and converted rest‐potentiation into rest depression.
Rest‐potentiation was blocked preferentially by ryanodine compared to post‐extrasystolic potentiation.
An increase in the contribution of extracellular Ca to the extrasystolic contraction could not entirely account for the post‐extrasystolic potentiation.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Prolonged rest, by itself, also caused depression of the first post‐rest contraction.
During rest‐potentiation, SR Ca seemed to play a greater role in contraction than transmembrane Ca influx.
However, the ability of the ‘release pool’ of Ca in the SR to be reprimed after a contraction was reduced.
This was seen as a decrease in post‐extrasystolic potentiation elicited immediately after rest.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>A decrease in stimulus interval was associated with a transient decrease in contraction amplitude followed by an increase.
An abrupt increase in stimulus interval had the opposite effect.
Ryanodine blocked the initial transient changes and accelerated the delayed changes.
These results suggest that the transient changes in contraction after sudden changes in drive interval are dependent on the SR.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Transmembrane Ca entry and the rate of recovery of the Ca release process (repriming) in the SR after a contraction seem to be interval‐dependent.
The data also indicate that different mechanisms are involved in post‐extrasystolic and rest‐potentiation.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The results are consistent with a model which proposes ‘recirculation’ of activator Ca within the SR after a contraction or of the presence of an appreciable amount of inactivation of the SR Ca release process during normal stimulation.
An increased pool of releasable Ca due to longer recirculation time or a time‐dependent decay in the level of inactivation of Ca release from the SR may give rise to rest‐potentiation.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
[Effect of cholinolytics on the course of traumatic shock]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1970 Mar-Apr;33(2):170-3.

[Effect of cholinolytics on the course of traumatic shock].

[Article in Russian]

Petukhov VI.

PMID: 4393233 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Low-frequency trains of paired stimuli induce long-term depression in area CA1 but not in dentate gyrus of the intact rat 1. Hippocampus. 1996;6(1):52-7. doi: 
10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1996)6:1<52::AID-HIPO9>3.0.CO;2-9.

Low-frequency trains of paired stimuli induce long-term depression in area CA1 
but not in dentate gyrus of the intact rat.

Doyère V(1)
 Errington ML, Laroche S, Bliss TV.
Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Neurobiologie de l'Apprentissage et de la Mémoire, CNRS URA 
1491, Université Paris Sud, Orsay, France.
We have examined the efficacy of a recently introduced protocol for inducing 
homosynaptic long-term depression (LTD) in area CA1 of the anesthetized rat 
(Thiels et al.
[1994] J Neurophysiol 72:3009-3116.).
In area CA1 of the awake 
animal, this protocol, consisting of 200 pairs of pulses delivered at 0.5 Hz, 
with an interpulse interval of 25 ms, consistently produced LTD, provided the 
initial pulse was sufficiently strong to produce significant paired-pulse 
depression of the evoked response.
We extended these experiments to the dentate 
gyrus, using either paired pulses given to the perforant path in the awake adult 
rat, or, in the anesthetized adult, a two-pathway pairing procedure, in which 
the first pulse was delivered to the commissural input to the dentate gyrus and 
the second to the perforant path.
In both cases, the first pulse led to 
substantial suppression of the response evoked by the second pulse.
With neither 
protocol, however, was there any evidence for LTD or depotentiation.
Paired-pulse stimulation of the perforant path of young rats (10-11 days) also 
failed to induce LTD or depotentiation of the population excitatory postsynaptic 
potential (EPSP).
Thus, the dentate gyrus in the intact animal appears to be 
less susceptible to LTD and depotentiation than area CA1, a conclusion 
consistent with previous experiments in which we found that stimulation at 1-5 
Hz produced LTD/depotentiation in area CA1 of young (but not adult) rats in vivo 
but was ineffective at any age in the dentate gyrus.
Our results do not rule out 
the possibility that other, untested protocols may produce homosynaptic LTD 
and/or depotentiation in the dentate gyrus in vivo.
DOI: 10.1002/(SICI)1098-1063(1996)6:1<52::AID-HIPO9>3.0.CO;2-9
PMID: 8878742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Circadian phagocytic activity in rats under light-dark and constant light regimens. 1. Rom J Physiol. 2002-2003;39-40:17-26.

Circadian phagocytic activity in rats under light-dark and constant light 
regimens.

Hriscu M(1)
 Saulea G, Ostriceanu S, Baciu I.
Author information:
(1)Prof Dr. Iuliu Moldovan Institute of Public Health, Cluj-Napoca.
The phagocytic function was proved to be a periodic, circadian process.
Its 
acrophase appears to be differently timed in species with different activity 
type, occurring in the evening in diurnal species and at night in nocturnal 
ones.
The main pineal hormone melatonin, whose secretion occurs strictly at 
dark, has been shown to play a role in the control of inflammation and to exert 
a certain stimulatory effect upon phagocytosis in vitro.
The aim of the present 
study was to assess whether the phagocytic activity of neutrophils in the blood 
of rats exhibits a circadian rhythmicity similar to that of other nocturnal 
rodents (mice) and also if a constant light regimen alters its amplitude and/or 
chronostructure.
Wistar rats were submitted to either an artificial light-dark 
12/12 regimen (LD) or to constant light (LL), for 15 days.
In vitro phagocytosis 
of the neutrophils in whole blood against E.coli was assessed at 10:00, 16:00, 
22:00, and 04:00 hours.
In LD, phagocytosis appears to be a rhythmical function, 
with statistically significant differences between the highest value at 04:00 
hrs and the lowest at 10:00 hrs.
Constant light induces a 30% depression of the 
phagocytic ability throughout the whole 24 hours cycle, without altering its 
oscillations.
The darkness period appears to play the role of a synchronizer; in 
its absence the rhythm tends to free-run.
It may be stated that rhythmical 
melatonin secretion is responsible only for maintenance of the phagocytic level, 
probably via the anterior hypothalamic area and thymus, while it cannot account 
directly for the nocturnal increase of phagocytosis.
PMID: 15984664 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of salts of ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid and sodium dimercaptopropane sulfonate on hemolytic activity of alpha-toxin of Clostridium perfringens]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1969 Nov-Dec;32(6):707-10.

[Effect of salts of ethylenediamine tetraacetic acid and sodium 
dimercaptopropane sulfonate on hemolytic activity of alpha-toxin of Clostridium 
perfringens].

[Article in Russian]

Bel'gova IN.

PMID: 4315040 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Inhibitory effect of 2
4-dichlorophenoxyacetate on the histochemical demonstration of phosphorylase using the lead precipitation technic].
1.
Acta Histochem.
1968;30(2):391-2.
[Inhibitory effect of 2,4-dichlorophenoxyacetate on the histochemical 
demonstration of phosphorylase using the lead precipitation technic].
[Article in German]

Dorn A.

PMID: 4235606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of reticuloendothelial blockade on tissue distribution of 99mTc-labeled synthetic liposomes in ehrlich solid tumor-bearing mice. 1. Chem Pharm Bull (Tokyo). 1991 Jan;39(1):230-2. doi: 10.1248/cpb.39.230.

Effect of reticuloendothelial blockade on tissue distribution of 99mTc-labeled 
synthetic liposomes in Ehrlich solid tumor-bearing mice.

Goto R(1)
 Kubo H, Okada S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Radiobiochemistry, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Shizuoka, Japan.
The effect of a reticuloendothelial blockade was examined on the tissue 
distribution of 99mTc-labeled synthetic liposomes prepared from N,N-didodecyl-N 
alpha-[6-(trimethylammonio)hexanoyl]-L-alaninamide bromide (N+C5Ala2C12) in 
Ehrlich solid tumor-bearing mice.
While a pre-dose of unlabeled phosphatidyl 
choline liposomes (natural liposomes) hardly influenced the tissue distribution 
of N+C5Ala2C12 liposomes, the pretreatment of dextran sulfate depressed the 
uptake in liver accompanied by increasing that in tumor and other tissues except 
the stomach.
However, the extent of liver depression of N+C5Ala2C12 liposomes by 
dextran sulfate was lower than that of natural liposomes and the pre-dose of 
unlabeled natural liposomes had a minor effect on the tissue distribution of 
N+C5Ala2C12 liposomes compared with that of natural liposomes.
In the liver 
uptake of N+C5Ala2C12 liposomes, it was suggested that Kupffer cell phagocytosis 
was not the main mechanism.
DOI: 10.1248/cpb.39.230
PMID: 2049808 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
High K+ effects on PAH transport and permeabilities in isolated snake renal tubules <jats:p> Effects of high potassium concentrations on para-aminohippurate (PAH) transport by isolated
 perfused snake (Thamnophis spp.)
distal-proximal renal tubules were studied.
Increasing the potassium concentration in bath from 3 mM TO 10 mM OR 40 MM led to about 50% decrease in net PAH transport from bath to lumen in less than 10 min, but transport still occurred against concentration gradient.
Cell water PAH concentration was not significantly depressed in 10 mMpotassium and was nearly double control level in 40 mM potassium.
Apparent luminal membrane permeability to PAH, calculated from perfusion studies, averaged about 3.5 x 10(-5) cm sec(-1) in 3 mM potassium, 1.15 x 10(-5) cm sec(-1) in 10 mM potassium, and 0.48 x 10(-5) cm sec(-1) in 40 mM potassium.
Apparent peritubular membrane permeability, determined from PAH efflux from tubules with oil-filled lumens averaged about 0.5 x 10(-5) cm sec(-1) in 3 mM potassium, 0.29 x 10(-5) cm sec(-1) in 10 mM potassium, and 0.17 x 10(-5) cm sec(-1) in 40 mM potassium.
These data suggest that high potassium concentrations depress transepithelial PAH transport primarily by reducing luminal and peritubular membrane permeabilities.
Effect of high potassium on PAH transport was reversed within 20 min after restoration of control potassium concentration.
</jats:p>
Adrenergic and Serotoninergic Control of Growth Hormone Secretion in Adult Male Rats1 1. Endocrinology. 1972 May;90(5):1231-7. doi: 10.1210/endo-90-5-1231.

Adrenergic and serotoninergic control of growth hormone secretion in adult male 
rats.

Collu R
 Fraschini F, Visconti P, Martini L.

DOI: 10.1210/endo-90-5-1231
PMID: 4401150 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Acute toxicity of prostaglandins E2
F2α and 15 (s) 15 methyl prostaglandin E2 methyl ester in the baboon 1.
Prostaglandins.
1974 Aug 10;7(3):215-21. doi: 10.1016/0090-6980(74)90005-7.
Acute toxicity of prostaglandins E2,F2alpha and 15 (S) 15 methyl prostaglandin 
E2 methyl ester in the baboon.
Ganesan PA, Karim SM.
DOI: 10.1016/0090-6980(74)90005-7
PMID: 4411859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of lithium salts on uptake of I125 by rat thyroid gland 1. Life Sci. 1970 Jan 8;9(1):9-20. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(70)90183-9.

Effect of lithium salts on uptake of I-125 by rat thyroid gland.

Hullin RP
 Johnson AW.
DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(70)90183-9
PMID: 5411555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Choleretic properties of compounds obtained from hedge nettle]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1969 Sep-Oct;32(5):575-7.

[Choleretic properties of compounds obtained from hedge nettle].

[Article in Russian]

Pasechnik IKh.

PMID: 5364673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Additive and synergistic inhibition of mammalian microsomal enzyme functions by piperonyl butoxide
 safrole and other methylenedioxyphenyl derivatives 1.
Experientia.
1971 Sep 15;27(9):1052-4. doi: 10.1007/BF02138875.
Additive and synergistic inhibition of mammalian microsomal enzyme functions by 
piperonyl butoxide, safrole and other methylenedioxyphenyl derivatives.
Friedman MA, Arnold E, Bishop Y, Epstein SS.
DOI: 10.1007/BF02138875
PMID: 5116130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Rapid Regulation of Depression-Associated Genes in a New Mouse Model Mimicking Interferon-α-Related Depression in Hepatitis C Virus Infection 1. Mol Neurobiol. 2015 Aug;52(1):318-29. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8861-z. Epub
2014  Aug 27.

Rapid Regulation of Depression-Associated Genes in a New Mouse Model Mimicking 
Interferon-α-Related Depression in Hepatitis C Virus Infection.

Hoyo-Becerra C(1)
 Liu Z, Yao J, Kaltwasser B, Gerken G, Hermann DM, Schlaak JF.
Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology and Hepatology, University Hospital Essen, 
Essen, Germany.
Major depression is a serious side effect of interferon-α (IFN-α), which is used 
in the therapy of hepatitis C virus (HCV) infection.
Due to the lack of 
reproducible animal models, the mechanisms underlying IFN-α-related depression 
are largely unknown.
We herein established a mouse model, in which murine IFN-α 
(250 IU/day) and polyinosinic/polycytidylic acid (poly(I:C); 1 μg/day), a 
toll-like receptor-3 (TLR3) agonist that mimics the effect of HCV double-strand 
RNA, were continuously infused into the lateral ventricle via miniosmotic pumps 
over up to 14 days.
The delivery of IFN-α and poly(I:C), but not of IFN-α or 
poly(I:C) alone, resulted in a reproducible depression-like state that was 
characterized by reduced exploration behavior in open-field tests, increased 
immobility in tail suspension and forced swimming tests, and a moderate loss of 
body weight.
In the hippocampus and prefrontal cortex, the pro-inflammatory 
genes TNF-α, IL-6, tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases-1 (Timp-1), CXC motif 
ligand-1 (Cxcl1), Cxcl10, and CC motif ligand-5 (Ccl5) were synergistically 
induced by IFN-α and poly(I:C), most pronounced after 14-day exposure.
In 
comparison, the interferon-inducible genes of signal transducer and activator of 
transcription-1 (Stat1), guanylate binding protein-1 (Gbp1), proteasome 
subunit-β type-9 (Psmb9), ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme E2L-6 (Ube2l6), receptor 
transporter protein-4 (Rtp4), and GTP cyclohydrolase-1 (Gch1), which had 
previously been elevated in the blood of IFN-α-treated patients developing 
depression, in the brains of suicidal individuals, and in primary neurons 
exposed to IFN-α and poly(I:C), were induced even earlier, reaching maximum 
levels mostly after 24 hours.
We propose that interferon-inducible genes might 
be useful markers of imminent depression.
DOI: 10.1007/s12035-014-8861-z
PMID: 25159480 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Data on the toxicological and hygienic evaluation of the new organophosphorus insecticide gardona]. 1. Vopr Pitan. 1973 Nov-Dec;(6):60-5.

[Data on the toxicological and hygienic evaluation of the new organophosphorus 
insecticide gardona].

[Article in Russian]

Bolotnyĭ AV
 Iurkova ZF.
PMID: 4804112 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Progesterone enhances motor
 anxiolytic, analgesic, and antidepressive behavior of wild-type mice, but not those deficient in type 1 5α-reductase 1.
Brain Res.
2004 Apr 9;1004(1-2):116-24. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.01.020.
Progesterone enhances motor, anxiolytic, analgesic, and antidepressive behavior 
of wild-type mice, but not those deficient in type 1 5 alpha-reductase.
Frye CA(1), Walf AA, Rhodes ME, Harney JP.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology and Center for Neurobiology, The University at 
Albany-SUNY, 1400 Washington Avenue, Albany, NY 12222, USA.
cafrye@cnsunix.albany.edu

The importance of progesterone's (P(4)) metabolism by the 5 alpha-reductase type 
I enzyme was examined in homozygous and heterozygous 5 alpha-reductase type I 
knockout mice and their wild-type siblings.
P(4) (1.0 mg) or vehicle was 
administered and effects on motor, anxiety, nociceptive, and depression behavior 
were observed.
After testing, whole-brain progesterone and 5 alpha-pregnan-3 
alpha-ol-20-one (3 alpha,5 alpha-THP) levels were determined by 
radioimmunoassay.
Motor behavior in the horizontal crossing and open field tasks 
of 5 alpha-reductase-deficient mice administered P(4) was similar to vehicle 
control mice and significantly reduced compared to wild-type mice administered 
P(4).
In the open field, 5 alpha-reductase-deficient mice administered P(4) had 
a similar number of central entries as did vehicle control mice, both were lower 
than central entries of P(4)-administered wild-type mice.
However, in the plus 
maze, P(4) to 5 alpha-reductase-deficient or wild-type mice significantly 
increased open arm activity compared to vehicle-administered control mice.
P(4) 
to wild-type, but not 5 alpha-reductase-deficient mice, significantly increased 
latencies to lick front and back paws in response to radiant heat stimuli 
compared to vehicle administration to control mice.
In the forced swim test, 5 
alpha-reductase-deficient mice administered P(4) were similar to vehicle control 
mice and the latency to immobility was significantly decreased, and the duration 
of immobility was significantly increased, compared to wild-type mice 
administered P(4).
Thus, these data suggest metabolism by the 5 alpha-reductase 
type I enzyme may mitigate P(4)'s effects on some tasks of motor, anxiety, 
nociception, and depression behavior.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.01.020
PMID: 15033426 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Epidermal growth factor (EGF) inhibits the secretomotor response of the thyroid: effects of EGF on radioiodine turnover and fluid transport in cultured porcine thyroid cells <jats:title>ABSTRACT</jats:title>
        <jats:p>Thyrotrophin (4-256 μU/ml) promoted an increase in the rate of release of radioiodine from the organic iodine pool of cultured porcine thyroid cells in follicular formations. This action of TSH was antagonized by low concentrations of epidermal growth factor (EGF; 0·1–5 nmol/l). The maximal effect of EGF was reached by 0·5 nmol/l. EGF (0·5–5 nmol/l) also inhibited the stimulatory effect of 8-chloro cyclic AMP (0·06–1·0 nmol/l) on radioiodine turnover. Exposure of thyroid cultures to media with a calcium concentration of 17·7 μmol/l (1% of normal) resulted in a very marked increase in the rate of release of radioiodine. The effect of TSH in low-calcium media was to inhibit the increased release of radioiodine
 and EGF (0·5 nmol/l) antagonized this inhibitory effect of TSH.
The calcium ionophore, A23187, stimulated radioiodine release in a dose-dependent fashion, and EGF (1·7 nmol/l) inhibited this response.
Fluid transport in thyroid monolayers was stimulated by prostaglandin E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> (PGE<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>; 1 μmol/l).
EGF (5 nmol/l) also stimulated fluid transport, but antagonized the effect of PGE<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> added subsequently.
It was concluded that EGF exerted acute antagonistic effects on thyroid cell responses <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> to cyclic AMP and agents promoting accumulation of cyclic AMP in time-frames too short for these inhibitory effects to be attributable to the dedifferentiative effect of the growth factor.</jats:p>
        <jats:p><jats:italic>Journal of Endocrinology</jats:italic> (1991) <jats:bold>128,</jats:bold> 213–218</jats:p>
[Comparative dermatology: trichotillomania (author's transl)]. 1. Z Hautkr. 1981 May 15;56(10):629-30.

[Comparative dermatology: trichotillomania (author's transl)].

[Article in German]

Hartung J.

PMID: 7281859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Changes of quantal transmitter release caused by gadolinium ions at the frog neuromuscular junction <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The actions of the trivalent cation
 gadolinium (Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>), were studied on frog isolated neuromuscular preparations by conventional electrophysiological techniques.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>(450 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>) applied to normal or formamide‐treated cutaneous pectoris nerve‐muscle preparations induced, after a short delay, a complete block of neuromuscular transmission.
The reversibility of the effect was dependent on the time of exposure.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>(5–450 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>) had no consistent effect on the resting membrane potential of the muscle fibres.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>(5–40 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>) applied to preparations equilibrated in solutions containing high Mg<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>and low Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>reduced the mean quantal content of endplate potentials (e.p.ps) in a dose‐dependent manner.
Under those conditions, 3,4‐diaminopyridine (10 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>) consistently reversed the depression of evoked quantal release.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The calcium current entering motor nerve terminals, revealed after blocking presynaptic potassium currents with tetraethylammonium (10 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>) in the presence of elevated extracellular Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>(8 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>), was markedly reduced by Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>(0.2–0.5 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>).</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>(40–200 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>) increased the frequency of spontaneous miniature endplate potentials (m.e.p.ps) in junctions bathed either in normal Ringer solution or in a nominally Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐free medium supplemented with 0.7 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc> tetrodotoxin.
This effect may be due to Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>entry into the nerve endings since it is not reversed upon removal of extracellular Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>with chelators (1 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc> EGTA or EDTA).
Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>also enhanced the frequency of me.p.ps appearing after each nerve stimulus in junctions bathed in a medium containing high Mg<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>and low Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup></jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>, in concentrations higher than 100 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>, decreased reversibly the amplitude of m.e.p.ps suggesting a postsynaptic action.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>It is concluded that the block of nerve‐impulse evoked quantal release caused by Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>is related to its ability to block the calcium current entering the nerve endings, supporting the view that Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>blocks N‐type Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>channels; while the enhancement of spontaneous quantal release is probably the result of Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>entry into motor nerve endings.
Besides its dual prejunctional effects on quantal release it is suggested that Gd<jats:sup>3+</jats:sup>exerts a postsynaptic action on the endplate acetylcholine receptor‐channel complex.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
[Interaction of phenothiazinic anti-inflammatory agent
 protizinic acid, with the biopolymers: Inhibitory effects on functions of platelets (author's transl)].
1.
Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi.
1981 Jan;77(1):27-39.
[Interaction of phenothiazinic anti-inflammatory agent, protizinic acid, with 
the biopolymers: Inhibitory effects on functions of platelets (author's 
transl)].
[Article in Japanese]

Fujimura H, Tsurumi K, Nozaki M, Imai H, Niu K, Muramatsu Y.
Two types of phenothiazinic anti-inflammatory agents, protizinic acid (PZA) and 
metiazinic acid (MZA) were examined using 1) heat denaturation test, 2) 
heat-induced erythrocyte lysis, 3) several platelet functions, 4) model membrane 
systems containing the same phospholipids and cholesterol compositions as in 
platelets.
PZA and MZA were inhibited with heat denaturation in a similar manner 
seen with BSA and heat-induced erythrocyte lysis, and effects were more potent 
than indomethacin (IM).
PZA showed inhibitory effects similar to MZA on ADP or 
collagen-induced platelet aggregation.
However, in arachidonic acid (AA)-induced 
rabbit platelet aggregation, PZA had a more potent effect, similar to effects 
seen with IM and more potent than those of MZA.
PZA inhibited the lethal effect 
of AA in rabbits at concentrations lower then MZA.
To determine the sites of 
action, we examined the effects on uptake and release reactions of 3H-serotonin.
PZA and MZA did not affect the uptake reaction but did reduce the release of 
serotonin to a greater extent than seen with IM.
The tested drugs had little 
effect on the platelet aggregation in vivo.
To investigate the interaction of 
these drugs with lipid bilayers, we used liposomes as a model membrane, of which 
the lipids compositions were the same as that of platelets.
The tested drugs 
showed inhibitions of the liposome aggregation with addition of 6 mM Ca2+, in a 
dose dependent manner and similar to findings in the drug-platelet system.
In 
this experiment, PZA had a more potent interaction with lipid bilayers than did 
MZA.
These results suggest that interactions of PZA with the platelet membrane 
may be the origin of the PZA-induced inhibition of the platelet aggregation, in 
addition to the effect on the biosynthesis of prostaglandins.
PMID: 7262705 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Nitric oxide: inhibitory effects on endothelial cell calcium signaling
 prostaglandin I2 production and nitric oxide synthase expression 1.
Cardiovasc Res.
2004 Apr 1;62(1):194-201. doi:
10.1016/j.cardiores.2003.12.028.
Nitric oxide: inhibitory effects on endothelial cell calcium signaling, 
prostaglandin I2 production and nitric oxide synthase expression.
Takeuchi K(1), Watanabe H, Tran QK, Ozeki M, Sumi D, Hayashi T, Iguchi A, 
Ignarro LJ, Ohashi K, Hayashi H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine III, Hamamatsu University School of Medicine, 
Handayama, Hamamatsu 431-3192, Japan.
OBJECTIVE: Nitric oxide (NO) produced in large amounts by inducible nitric oxide 
synthase exerts many harmful effects such as stimulation of inflammation and 
induction of apoptosis.
The effects of excessive NO production on functions of 
endothelial cells, the major physiological source of NO, are not completely 
known.
The aim of this study was to investigate the role of NO on the regulation 
of endothelial cell Ca2+ signaling and endothelial cell function.
METHODS: Primary porcine aortic endothelial cells (PAECs) were used for all 
these studies.
Intracellular Ca2+ concentrations ([Ca2+]i) were measured using 
fura-2/AM.
Production of prostaglandin I2 (PGI2) and cyclic GMP were assessed 
using enzyme immunoassays, and endothelial NO synthase protein expression was 
evaluated by Western blotting.
RESULTS: Bradykinin (BK, 10 nM) and thapsigargin (TG, 1 microM) provoked large 
increases in [Ca2+]i.
The NO donor NOC12 reduced these responses, respectively, 
by 21% and 31% at 100 microM, 60% and 55% at 300 microM, and 74% and 78% at 500 
microM.
These effects were also observed with other NO donors including spermine 
NONOate and NOC18, and were completely prevented by carboxy-PTIO (200 microM), 
an NO scavenger.
8-Bromo-cGMP, however, had no effects on BK- and TG-stimulated 
Ca2+ responses.
A 30-fold increase in PGI2 production was observed in cells 
stimulated with BK.
NOC12 again reduced this response by 12%, 54%, 83% and 95% 
at 10, 100, 300 and 500 microM, respectively.
Endothelial NO synthase protein 
level was reduced by 2%, 15%, 36 and 47% after 2, 6, 12 and 24 h, respectively, 
of incubation with NOC18, a NO donor with long half-life.
CONCLUSIONS: NO, when produced in large amounts, can inhibit agonist-induced 
Ca2+ responses independently of cyclic GMP, reduce the production of 
endothelium-derived relaxing factors (EDRFs) and interfere with endothelial NO 
synthase protein expression.
DOI: 10.1016/j.cardiores.2003.12.028
PMID: 15023566 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Synaptic Depression and Recovery on Synchronous Network Activity 1. J Clin Neurophysiol. 2007 Apr;24(2):165-74. doi: 10.1097/WNP.0b013e318033756f.

Effects of synaptic depression and recovery on synchronous network activity.

Swiercz W(1)
 Cios K, Hellier J, Yee A, Staley K.

Author information:
(1)From the Neurology Department, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA 
02114, USA.
The output of an artificial neural network of spiking neurons linked by 
glutamatergic synapses subject to use-dependent depression was compared with 
physiologic data obtained from rat hippocampal area CA3 in vitro.
The authors 
evaluated how network burst initiation and termination was affected by 
activity-dependent depression and recovery under a variety of experimental 
conditions including neuronal membrane depolarization, altered glutamate release 
probability, the strength of synaptic inhibition, and long-term potentiation and 
long-term depression of recurrent glutamatergic synapses.
The results of 
computational experiments agreed with the in vitro data and support the idea 
that synaptic properties, including activity-dependent depression and recovery, 
play important roles in the timing and duration of spontaneous bursts of network 
activity.
This validated network model is useful for experiments that are not 
feasible in vitro, and makes possible the investigation of two-dimensional 
aspects of burst propagation and termination.
DOI: 10.1097/WNP.0b013e318033756f
PMID: 17414972 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Identification in human seminal fluid of an inhibin-like factor which selectively regulates FSH secretion. 1. J Reprod Fertil Suppl. 1979;(26):123-33.

Identification in human seminal fluid of an inhibin-like factor which 
selectively regulates FSH secretion.

Franchimont P
 Demoulin A, Verstraelen-Proyard J, Hazee-Hagelstein MT, Tunbridge 
WM.
Human seminal plasma obtained by centrifugation of human semen contains a factor 
capable of selectively inhibiting the secretion of FSH both in vivo (reduction 
of the levels of FSH in rats 24 h after castration) and in vitro (reduction of 
the FSH released by LH-RH in rat pituitary cell culture).
This effect is not due 
to testosterone, oestradiol-17 beta or progesterone present in the active 
fractions.
The factor has the characteristics of a protein in that its 
biological activity is destroyed by heat and trypsin digestion.
It does not 
resemble androgen-binding protein.
The biological action is not completely 
specific for FSH as inhibition of LH can be seen with doses usually higher than 
those which produce inhibition of FSH alone.
There is no effect on TSH or 
prolactin levels in vitro.
The factor clearly acts on the release and synthesis 
of gonadotrophins by gonadotrophs but an effect on the hypothalamus is not 
excluded.
This factor fits the definition of inhibin.
PMID: 293406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of Glycine Transporter-I as a Novel Mechanism for the Treatment of Depression 1. Biol Psychiatry. 2013 Nov 15;74(10):734-41. doi:
10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.02.020.  Epub 2013 Apr 3.

Inhibition of glycine transporter-I as a novel mechanism for the treatment of 
depression.

Huang CC(1)
 Wei IH, Huang CL, Chen KT, Tsai MH, Tsai P, Tun R, Huang KH, Chang 
YC, Lane HY, Tsai GE.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, China Medical University Hospital, Taichung, 
Taiwan; Institute of Clinical Medical Science, China Medical University, 
Taichung, Taiwan.
Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry.
2013 Nov 15;74(10):710-1. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.08.019.
BACKGROUND: Antidepressants, aiming at monoaminergic neurotransmission, exhibit 
delayed onset of action, limited efficacy, and poor compliance.
Glutamatergic 
neurotransmission is involved in depression.
However, it is unclear whether 
enhancement of the N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) subtype glutamate receptor can be 
a treatment for depression.
METHODS: We studied sarcosine, a glycine transporter-I inhibitor that 
potentiates NMDA function, in animal models and in depressed patients.
We 
investigated its effects in forced swim test, tail suspension test, elevated 
plus maze test, novelty-suppressed feeding test, and chronic unpredictable 
stress test in rats and conducted a 6-week randomized, double-blinded, 
citalopram-controlled trial in 40 patients with major depressive disorder.
Clinical efficacy and side effects were assessed biweekly, with the main 
outcomes of Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, Global Assessment of Function, and 
remission rate.
The time course of response and dropout rates was also compared.
RESULTS: Sarcosine decreased immobility in the forced swim test and tail 
suspension test, reduced the latency to feed in the novelty-suppressed feeding 
test, and reversed behavioral deficits caused by chronic unpredictable stress 
test, which are characteristics for an antidepressant.
In the clinical study, 
sarcosine substantially improved scores of Hamilton Depression Rating Scale, 
Clinical Global Impression, and Global Assessment of Function more than 
citalopram treatment.
Sarcosine-treated patients were much more likely and 
quicker to remit and less likely to drop out.
Sarcosine was well tolerated 
without significant side effects.
CONCLUSIONS: Our preliminary findings suggest that enhancing NMDA function can 
improve depression-like behaviors in rodent models and in human depression.
Establishment of glycine transporter-I inhibition as a novel treatment for 
depression waits for confirmation by further proof-of-principle studies.
Copyright © 2013 Society of Biological Psychiatry.
Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2013.02.020
PMID: 23562005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Renal function and methoxyflurane anaesthesia 1. Can Anaesth Soc J. 1971 Mar;18(2):131-6. doi: 10.1007/BF03025441.

Renal function and methoxyflurane anaesthesia.

McIntyre JW
 Russel JC.
DOI: 10.1007/BF03025441
PMID: 4252247 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of chronic undernourishment on the synaptic depression of cutaneous pathways in the rat spinal cord 1. Brain Res Bull. 2012 Nov 1;89(3-4):97-101. doi: 
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2012.07.008. Epub 2012 Jul 22.

The effect of chronic undernourishment on the synaptic depression of cutaneous 
pathways in the rat spinal cord.

Quiroz-González S(1)
 Segura-Alegría B, Olmos JC, Jiménez-Estrada I.
Author information:
(1)Departamento de Fisiología, Biofísica y Neurociencias, Centro de 
Investigación y Estudios Avanzados del IPN, Av.
Instituto Politécnico Nacional 
2508, Col. San Pedro Zacatenco, AP.
14-740 México, D.F., CP 07000, Mexico.
quiroz@fisio.cinvestav.mx

The aim of this study was to determine the effect of chronic undernourishment on 
the amplitude depression of the first negative component in the cord dorsum 
potentials (N(1)-CDPs) caused by the conditioning stimulation of sensory 
cutaneous nerves in the rat spinal cord.
Single electrical pulses (1Hz; 2 times 
threshold) applied to the sural (SU) nerve of control rats (n=14) produced CDPs 
with a first negative component (N(1)-CDPs) larger in amplitude (14.2±1.3%, 
p<0.01) than those recorded in chronically undernourished rats (n=14; 3 times 
threshold).
The conditioning stimulation of the SP nerve (4 shocks at 300Hz, 
3×T) in the control rats (n=5) evoked a long-lasting (~200ms) depression of the 
N(1)-CDP (60.2±7.2%).
In contrast such depression was smaller in magnitude 
(42.5±5.7%, p<0.01) and time course (100-120ms) in undernourished rats (n=7).
The systemic application of picrotoxin (PTX) reduced, but did not abolish the 
conditioned depression of the N(1)-CDPs and DRPs in both the control and 
undernourished rats.
By assuming that the depression of the N(1)-CDPs is 
representative of presynaptic mechanisms, it is proposed that chronic 
undernourishment influence the activation of presynaptic neuronal pathways that 
regulate the transmitter release of cutaneous afferent fibers in the spinal cord 
and such effect could act as a compensatory mechanism that counterbalances the 
decreased activation of spinal neurons by the reduced afferent input in the rat.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2012.07.008
PMID: 22828571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Energetics of the negative and positive inotropism of pentobarbitone sodium in the canine left ventricle 1. Cardiovasc Res. 1994 Apr;28(4):557-64. doi: 10.1093/cvr/28.4.557.

Energetics of the negative and positive inotropism of pentobarbitone sodium in 
the canine left ventricle.

Namba T(1)
 Takaki M, Araki J, Ishioka K, Suga H.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Physiology, Okayama University Medical School, Okayama 
City.
OBJECTIVE: Pentobarbitone (sodium) is an anaesthetic widely used in animal 
experiments.
It is known to be a cardiovascular depressant and a coronary 
dilator, but its effects on myocardial energetics in relation to its negative 
and positive (due to Gregg's phenomenon) inotropism have not been studied.
The 
aim of this study was therefore to determine whether and how pentobarbitone 
affects cardiac mechanoenergetics compared with other negative inotropic agents 
for which data are already available.
METHODS: The effects of graded doses of intracoronary pentobarbitone on 
mechanoenergetics were studied in the excised cross circulated left ventricles 
of 12 dogs.
The framework of the Emax (a contractility index)--VO2 (myocardial 
oxygen consumption)--PVA (systolic pressure-volume area, a measure of total 
mechanical energy) relationships was fully utilised.
RESULTS: Pentobarbitone increased Emax at low doses in five of the 12 hearts.
In 
two of these five hearts, a marked coronary dilatation was found.
Pentobarbitone 
decreased Emax dose dependently at high doses in all the hearts and lowered the 
VO2 intercept but not the slope (oxygen cost of PVA) of the VO2-PVA relation.
There was no difference in oxygen cost of Emax between pentobarbitone and CaCl2, 
although they have opposite inotropism.
These findings suggest that 
pentobarbitone depresses myocardial mechanoenergetics via suppression of total 
calcium handling in the excitation-contraction-relaxation coupling.
CONCLUSIONS: Pentobarbitone at low doses partly acts as a positive inotropic 
agent, but at high doses it acts as a negative inotropic agent like beta 
blockers and calcium antagonists on cardiac mechanoenergetics in canine blood 
perfused hearts.
DOI: 10.1093/cvr/28.4.557
PMID: 8181046 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Postnatal development of postganglionic parasympathetic neurones in the heart of the albino rat. 1. Physiol Bohemoslov. 1979;28(6):561-8.

Postnatal development of postganglionic parasympathetic neurones in the heart of 
the albino rat.

Vlk J.

Electrical stimulation of the sinoatrial node region of isolated atria in medium 
containing physostigmine (0.1 micrograms/ml) produces a negative chronotropic 
effect whose intensity and duration depend mainly on the amount of acetylcholine 
released from postganglionic parasympathetic fibres endings. This technique was 
used to study functional maturation of the given neurones during postnatal 
development of albino rats. Preparations from animals of different ages were 
stimulated with 2-second bursts of rectangular pulses (frequency 50 Hz
 pulse 
duration 0.02 ms, voltage 22.5--27.5 V) and frequency changes of the preparation 
were registered by recording extracellular action potentials.
At 10 days the 
negative chronotropic effect is very weak and at 15 days it is only slightly 
stronger, but at 18 days it is almost the same as in adult animals.
At 24 and 34 
days the reaction is somewhat stronger than in adulthood.
It can be concluded 
from these observations that functional maturation of the postganglionic 
parasympathetic neurones innervating the sinoatrial node in albino rats occurs 
between the 10th and 20th day of postnatal life.
PMID: 160578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Regulation of phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE4) expression in mouse brain by repeated antidepressant treatment: Comparison with rolipram 1. Brain Res. 2006 Jun 22;1096(1):104-12. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.04.032.
Epub  2006 May 26.

Regulation of phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE4) expression in mouse brain by repeated 
antidepressant treatment: comparison with rolipram.

Dlaboga D(1)
 Hajjhussein H, O'Donnell JM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Medicine & Psychiatry, West Virginia University 
Health Sciences Center, Morgantown, 26506-9128, USA.
Cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase-4 (PDE4) is a component of signaling 
pathways involved in the mediation of antidepressant activity.
Of the four PDE4 
subtypes, PDE4D appears to be of particular importance, given the finding that 
PDE4D-deficient mice exhibit an antidepressant-like behavioral phenotype.
In 
mouse hippocampus and cerebral cortex, the effects of repeated treatment with 
the antidepressants desipramine and fluoxetine or the PDE4 inhibitor rolipram on 
the expression of PDE4D was compared to that of PDE4A and PDE4B, the other two 
subtypes expressed in the brain.
Expression of PDE4D was increased by all drugs 
tested, with the exception of desipramine in hippocampus.
By contrast, these 
treatments affected PDE4A and PDE4B expression differentially.
In hippocampus, 
antidepressants increased PDE4A and decreased PDE4B, whereas ROL decreased PDE4A 
and did not change PDE4B.
In cerebral cortex, antidepressants increased PDE4A 
and did not change PDE4B, whereas ROL did not change PDE4A and increased PDE4B.
3H-Rolipram binding was increased in cytosolic, but not in membrane, fractions 
of cerebral cortex by all drugs tested; there were no changes observed in 
hippocampus.
Overall, the present results suggest some species-dependence of the 
regulation of PDE4 subtypes, based on data obtained previously using rats.
They 
also suggest that the PDE4D subtype may be of particular importance as an 
antidepressant target in that it is regulated by repeated treatment with both 
norepinephrine and serotonin reuptake inhibitors as well as by the PDE4 
inhibitor rolipram, drugs that produce antidepressant effects via different 
neuropharmacological mechanisms.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.04.032
PMID: 16730340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Tolerance to and dependence on opioids in isolated longitudinal muscle of guinea pig ileum. Validity of the muscle preparation as a receptor model for opioids (author's transl)]. 1. Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi. 1980 Sep;76(5):347-54.

[Tolerance to and dependence on opioids in isolated longitudinal muscle of 
guinea pig ileum. Validity of the muscle preparation as a receptor model for 
opioids (author's transl)].

[Article in Japanese]

Kaneto H
 Watanabe J.

Contractions evoked by electrical stimulation of isolated longitudinal muscle 
preparations of guinea pig ileum were inhibited by the addition of opioids in 
the order of morphine = methionine enkephalin greater than pentazocine 
pethidine.
Incubation of the preparation in the medium containing opioids at 4 
degrees C for 22 hr resulted in a tolerance to the inhibitory effect in morphine 
and pethidine but in the case of pentazocine and met-enkephalin tolerance did 
not develop under the conditions employed.
The same treatment with morphine, 
pethidine and pentazocine resulted in the development of dependence as 
demonstrated by naloxone provoked contracture or increase in the height of 
contraction.
Opiate and enkephalin receptors are known to be unevenly 
distributed in the ileum and a significant difference was also observed in the 
distribution patterns of both receptors.
Distribution of the receptors did not 
parallel the effect of opioids, thereby indicating a multiplicity in receptors.
However, under the conditions employed in the present experiments, our results 
reflect the in vivo effects of opioids, such as analgesic effect or tolerance 
and dependence liability, and the validity of this preparation for the 
evaluation of opioids was confirmed.
PMID: 6259029 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The antidepressant amitriptyline shows potent therapeutic activity against multiple myeloma 1. Anticancer Drugs. 2013 Sep;24(8):792-8. doi: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e3283628c21.

The antidepressant amitriptyline shows potent therapeutic activity against 
multiple myeloma.

Zhang Z(1)
 Du X, Zhao C, Cao B, Zhao Y, Mao X.
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Targeted Drug Discovery, Cyrus Tang Hematology Center, School 
of Pharmacy, Soochow University, Suzhou, People's Republic of China.
Our previous study indicated that the antidepressant amitriptyline showed potent 
activity in inducing multiple myeloma (MM) cell apoptosis in vitro.
In the 
present study, we further showed that amitriptyline was active against MM in 
vivo.
Oral administration of amitriptyline significantly decreased tumor growth 
in two MM xenograft models derived from murine and human MM cells, respectively.
Molecular pathological analysis showed that amitriptyline induced p53, activated 
caspase-3, and decreased antiapoptotic Bcl-2 and Mcl-1 in tumor tissues.
Amitriptyline also significantly extended the survival period of 
MM-tumor-bearing mice.
In the in-vitro study, we also found that amitriptyline 
synergistically induced MM cell apoptosis in combination with bortezomib, the 
most potent anti-MM agent.
Because amitriptyline has been proposed to control 
cancer-associated pain, depression, and anxiety, proper application of 
amitriptyline will benefit MM patients.
DOI: 10.1097/CAD.0b013e3283628c21
PMID: 23708819 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of NMDA receptor subtypes in different forms of NMDA-dependent synaptic plasticity 1. BMC Neurosci. 2007 Jul 26;8:55. doi: 10.1186/1471-2202-8-55.

Role of NMDA receptor subtypes in different forms of NMDA-dependent synaptic 
plasticity.

Li R(1)
 Huang FS, Abbas AK, Wigström H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Medical Biophysics, Institute of Neuroscience and Physiology, 
Göteborg University, Göteborg, Sweden.
liruiray@physiol.gu.se

BACKGROUND: The involvement of different NMDA receptor (NMDAR) subunits has been 
implicated in several forms of synaptic plasticity.
However, it is still 
controversial to what extent the involvement is specific, and little is known 
about the role of NMDAR subunits in certain "non-conventional" forms of 
plasticity.
In this study we used subunit-specific blockers to test the roles of 
NR2A- and NR2B-containing NMDARs in a type of chemical long-term depression 
(LTD) induced by brief bath application of the NMDAR agonist NMDA to hippocampal 
slices from 12-18 days old rats.
For comparison, we also examined other forms of 
plasticity, including a "slow LTD" induced by 0.1 Hz stimulation under low Mg2+ 
conditions as well as long-term potentiation (LTP).
RESULTS: A blocker of NR2A-containing NMDARs, NVP-AAM077 (NVP), substantially 
reduced the two forms of studied depression whereas blockers of NR2B-containing 
NMDARs, Ro25-6981 (Ro) or Ifenprodil (Ife), had no significant effect on them.
LTP appeared to be more sensitive as it was fully blocked by NVP and partially 
blocked by Ro or Ife.
However, the blocking effects of NVP could be counteracted 
by general amplification of NMDA responses by lowering Mg2+ concentration in the 
perfusion solution.
Applying NVP or Ro/Ife on isolated NMDA-EPSPs recorded in 
low Mg2+ solution reduced responses to about 70% and 20% of initial size, 
respectively, whereas coapplication of both blockers almost completely abolished 
the responses.
Additionally, NMDA application caused depotentiation of a pathway 
with prior tetanus-induced LTP, and NVP but not Ro/Ife substantially prevented 
that depotentiation as well as the chemical LTD of the control pathway.
A second 
tetanus on the LTP pathway induced repotentiation which was fully blocked by NVP 
but partially blocked by Ro/Ife.
CONCLUSION: All of these results on hippocampal slices from young rats can be 
explained by a simple model, in which NR2A subunits dominate over NR2B subunits 
with respect to both plasticity and NMDAR-mediated responses.
The model suggests 
that Ca2+ influx into the postsynaptic spine via different subtypes of NMDARs 
makes up a "final common pathway", controlling synaptic plasticity by its 
magnitude and temporal pattern regardless of the source.
DOI: 10.1186/1471-2202-8-55
PMCID: PMC1959237
PMID: 17655746 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Repetitive hypoxia rapidly depresses arousal from active sleep in newborn lambs <jats:p>
<jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Arousal from sleep is an important protective mechanism that is depressed by repeated episodes of hypoxia. We aimed to determine how rapidly arousal depression occurs during repeated hypoxia and to determine if the depression is sleep state specific.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Three successive 12 h overnight sleep recordings were performed in six newborn lambs instrumented to record sleep state
 blood pressure, heart rate and blood gases.
The first (control) and third (recovery) nights were baseline studies (inspired oxygen fraction, <jats:italic>F</jats:italic><jats:sub>I,O2 = 0.21</jats:sub>) to determine the spontaneous arousal probability.
During the second (test) study night, lambs were exposed to a 60 s episode of isocapnic hypoxia (<jats:italic>F</jats:italic><jats:sub>I,O2 = 0.10</jats:sub>; inspired carbon dioxide fraction, <jats:italic>F</jats:italic><jats:sub>I,CO2 = 0.03</jats:sub>) during every epoch of sleep.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>During quiet sleep (QS), the probability of arousing to hypoxia (56 %) remained significantly higher than the probability of arousing spontaneously (18 %) throughout the repeated hypoxic exposures (<jats:styled-content>χ<jats:sup>2</jats:sup>= 81.5, <jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.001</jats:styled-content>).
By contrast, during active sleep (AS) arousal rapidly became depressed with repetition of the hypoxic stimulus; the probability of arousal in hypoxia (52 %) was significantly higher than the probability of spontaneous arousal (12 %) during the first ten hypoxic exposures (<jats:styled-content>χ<jats:sup>2</jats:sup>= 18.2, <jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.001</jats:styled-content>), but there was no difference thereafter.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>We conclude that, when repeated, moderate hypoxia very rapidly becomes ineffective as an arousing stimulus in AS, but not in QS.
These results suggest that the arousal mechanism is particularly vulnerable to failure during AS.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list>
</jats:p>
Aortic baroreceptor characteristics in dogs with chronic high output failure 1. Basic Res Cardiol. 1986 Mar-Apr;81(2):111-22. doi: 10.1007/BF01907376.

Aortic baroreceptor characteristics in dogs with chronic high output failure.

Niebauer MJ
 Holmberg MJ, Zucker IH.
It has been shown that the arterial baroreflex is depressed in heart failure.
The role of alterations in afferent discharge as a possible mechanism for this 
depression has not been investigated previously.
Single unit aortic baroreceptor 
activity was recorded from six normal dogs and from nine dogs, each with a 
chronic aorto-caval fistula (AVF).
At the time of the acute experiment, mean 
arterial blood pressure (MABP) was not significantly different in the two groups 
of dogs; however, pulse pressure was significantly higher in the AVF dogs (45.7 
+/- 2.4 mm Hg vs, 24.4 +/- 2.0 mm Hg; p less than 0.001).
Left ventricular 
end-diastolic pressure (LVEDP) was higher in the AVF dogs (31.3 +/- 2.0 vs 5.6 
+/- 1.8 mm Hg; p less than 0.001).
AVF dogs had elevated heart weight/body 
weight ratios.
The relationship of systolic aortic pressure to systolic 
discharge was examined by changing aortic pressure with aortic and vena caval 
occluders.
The peak gain (normalized to maximum discharge) averaged 2.19 +/- 
0.27 in the normal dogs compared to 1.15 +/- 0.09 in the AVF group (p less than 
0.01).
Saturation pressures and maximum discharge rates were greater in the AVF 
dogs although the threshold pressures were not different in the two groups.
This 
data suggests that there is an attenuated response of aortic baroreceptor 
discharge in dogs with chronic volume overload and this abnormality may 
partially be responsible for the abnormal baroreflex in heart failure.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01907376
PMID: 3741352 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Modification of the proline residue of TRH enhances biological activity and inhibits degradation 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1980 Aug 22;66(1):65-71. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(80)90295-2.

Modification of the proline residue of TRH enhances biological activity and 
inhibits degradation.

Brewster D
 Dettmar PW, Lynn AG, Metcalf G, Morgan BA, Rance MJ.
An analogue of TRH with a modified proline residue (Pyr-His-MepNH2) has been 
synthesised and evaluated.
In CNS, but not endocrine tests the analogue had 
improved activity compared to TRH and was more resistant to enzymatic 
degradation.
A metabolite of TRH, His-Pro, was without biological activity.
It 
is concluded that the biological actions attributed to TRH are due to the parent 
tripeptide rather than His-Pro and that these actions can be enhanced by 
improving the biological stability of TRH.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(80)90295-2
PMID: 6773784 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Zoledronate: the preclinical pharmacology. 1. Br J Clin Pract Suppl. 1996 Sep;87:16-8; discussion 22.

Zoledronate: the preclinical pharmacology.

Green J(1).

Author information:
(1)Ciba
 Basel, Switzerland.
PMID: 8995013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Analgesic and antiphlogistic action of amide and amine compounds. 1]. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1970 Aug;20(8):1009-18.

[Analgesic and antiphlogistic action of amide and amine compounds. 1].

[Article in German]

Artini D
 Logemann W, Melloni P, Vita G, Buttinoni A, Tommasini R.

PMID: 5536494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic oral administration of ginseng extract results in behavioral change but has no effects in mice models of affective and anxiety disorders <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Ginseng is a popular ‘tonic’ herb in Chinese traditional medicine with diverse biological activity. The core of ginseng's therapeutic abilities is thought to be its neuroprotective actions in increasing cellular resilience. These actions coincide with novel theories of affective and anxiety disorders and raise the possibility that ginseng may serve as medication for these common and devastating diseases. The present study was designed to explore the possible effects of chronic ginseng extract
 administered in a clinically relevant schedule (similar to antidepressants) in animal models of affective and anxiety disorders.</jats:p><jats:p>Groups of mice received chronic oral treatment with ginseng extract (500 mg/kg/day for 3 weeks) and were tested in a large open eld, in the emergence test for anxiolytic activity, the forced swim test for antidepressant activity and the amphetamine hyperactivity test for mood stabilizing activity.</jats:p><jats:p>Chronic ginseng had a signicant effect on reducing spontaneous locomotor activity in the open eld test but not on the distribution of activity and had no inßuence on the performance of mice in any of the specic models.</jats:p><jats:p>Although the extract used in this study contained signicant levels of ginsenosides, detailed analysis of the brain levels of the active ingredients of ginseng may be needed to make a far reaching conclusion.
However, the doses and schedule of administration of ginseng used in the present study induced some behavioral changes but did not inßuence affective‐ and anxiety‐like measures.
Copyright © 2006 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.</jats:p>
Uptake of GABA by neuronal and nonneuronal cells in dispersed cell cultures of postnatal rat cerebellum <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>A study was made of the time course and kinetics of [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]GABA uptake by dispersed cell cultures of postnatal rat cerebellum with and without neuronal cells. The properties of GABA neurons were calculated from the biochemical difference between the two types of cultures. It was found that for any given concentration of [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]GABA
 or any time up to 20 min, GABA neurons in cultures 21 days <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> had an average velocity of uptake several orders of magnitude greater than that of nonneuronal cells.
In addition, the apparent <jats:italic>K</jats:italic><jats:sub>m</jats:sub> values for GABA neurons for high and low affinity uptake were 0.33 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> <jats:italic>M</jats:italic> and 41.8 × 10<jats:sup>−4</jats:sup> <jats:italic>M</jats:italic>, respectively.
For nonneuronal cells, the apparent <jats:italic>K</jats:italic><jats:sub>m</jats:sub> for high affinity uptake was 0.29 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> <jats:italic>M.</jats:italic> The apparent <jats:italic>V</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub> values for GABA neurons for high and low affinity uptake were 28.7 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> mol/g DNA/min and 151.5 mmol/g DNA/min, respectively.
For nonneuronal cells, the apparent <jats:italic>V</jats:italic><jats:sub>max</jats:sub> for high affinity uptake was 0.06 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> mol/g DNA/min.
No low affinity uptake system for nonneuronal cells could be detected after correcting the data for binding and diffusion.
By substituting the apparent kinetic constants in the Michaelis‐Menten equation, it was determined that for GABA concentrations of 5 × 10<jats:sup>−9</jats:sup> <jats:italic>M</jats:italic> to 1 m<jats:italic>M</jats:italic> or higher over 99% of the GABA should be accumulated by GABA neurons, given equal access of all cells to the label.
In addition, high affinity uptake of [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]GABA by GABA neurons was completely blocked by treatment with 0.2 m<jats:italic>M</jats:italic> ouabain, whereas that by nonneuronal cells was only slightly decreased.
Most (75–85%) of the [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]GABA (4.4 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> <jats:italic>M</jats:italic>) uptake by both GABA neurons and nonneuronal cells was sodium and temperature dependent.</jats:p>
Decreased Release of D‐Aspartate in the Guinea Pig Spinal Cord After Lesions of the Red Nucleus <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> This study attempts to determine if fibers that project from the guinea pig red nucleus to the spinal cord use L‐glutamate and/or L‐aspartate as transmitters. Unilateral injections of kainic acid were placed stereotaxically in the red nucleus to destroy the cells of origin of the rubrospinal tract. Six days after the injection
 Nissl‐stained sections through the lesion site showed that the majority of neurons in the red nucleus ipsilateral to the kainic acid injection were destroyed.
In addition, the lesioned area included parts of the surrounding midbrain reticular formation.
Silver‐impregnated, transverse sections of the cervical spinal cord revealed the presence of degenerating fibers contralaterally in laminae IV–VII of the gray matter.
Ipsilaterally, very sparse degeneration was evident in laminae VII and VIII of the gray matter.
Two to six days after surgery, the electrically evoked, Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐dependent release of both D‐[<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]aspartate, a marker for glutamatergic/aspartatergic neurons, and γ‐amino[<jats:sup>14</jats:sup>C]‐butyric acid ([<jats:sup>14</jats:sup>C]GABA) was measured in dissected quadrants of the spinal cervical enlargement.
Lesions centered on the red nucleus depressed the release of D‐[<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]aspartate by 25–45% in dorsal and ventral quadrants of the cervical enlargement contralaterally.
The release of [<jats:sup>14</jats:sup>C]GABA was depressed by 27% in contralateral ventral quadrants.
To assess the contribution of rubro‐ versus reticulospinal fibers to the deficits in amino acid release, unilateral injections of kainic acid were placed stereotaxically in the midbrain reticular formation lateral to the red nucleus.
Nissl‐stained sections through the midbrain revealed the presence of extensive neuronal loss in the midbrain and rostral pontine reticular formation, whereas neurons in the red nucleus remained undamaged.
In the spinal cord, degenerating axons were present ipsilaterally in laminae VII and VIII of the gray matter.
Some fiber degeneration was also evident contralaterally in laminae V and VI of the gray matter.
This lesion did not affect the release of either D‐[<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]aspartate or [<jats:sup>14</jats:sup>C]GABA in the spinal cord.
The substantial decrements in D‐[<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]aspartate release following red nucleus lesions suggests that the synaptic endings of rubrospinal fibers mediate the release of D‐[<jats:sup>3H</jats:sup>]aspartate in the spinal cord.
Therefore, these fibers may be glutamatergic and/or aspartatergic.
Because other evidence suggests that rubrospinal neurons are probably not GABAergic, the depression of [<jats:sup>14</jats:sup>C]GABA release probably reflects changes in the activity of spinal interneurons following the loss of rubrospinal input.</jats:p>
Identification of limiting amino acids in methionine- and lysine-supplemented low-protein diets for turkeys 1. Poult Sci. 2000 Sep;79(9):1299-305. doi: 10.1093/ps/79.9.1299.

Identification of limiting amino acids in methionine- and lysine-supplemented 
low-protein diets for turkeys.

Waibel PE(1)
 Carlson CW, Brannon JA, Noll SL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Animal Science, University of Minnesota, St. Paul 55108, USA.
waibe001@tc.umn.edu

Large White male turkeys were fed 100, 85, 70, or 60% of NRC (1994) CP during 7 
to 28 d (Experiment (EXP) 1), 8 to 12 wk (EXP 2), and 16 to 20 wk (EXP 3) of 
age.
Diets contained corn, soybean, canola, and meat meals and were supplemented 
with Met and Lys to requirement.
The influence of supplementary amino acids (AA) 
was studied at each protein level.
Turkeys fed 85% CP gained BW similarly to 
those fed 100% of NRC CP (control) during each age range.
Supplemental Thr, Val, 
and Ile during 7 to 28 d or 8 to 12 wk, or Thr during 16 to 20 wk, did not 
result in positive BW gain response.
For turkeys fed 70% CP, BW gain was 
depressed compared with the normal-CP control in each period.
During 7 to 28 d 
and 8 to 12 wk of age, the combination of Thr, Ile, Val, Arg, and Trp to 100% of 
NRC reversed the BW depression; here only Thr, Ile, and Val were essential 
components of the response.
The BW depression during 16 to 20 wk was reversed by 
the combination of Thr, Ile, Val, and Trp.
For turkeys fed 60% of CP, BW gain 
was severely depressed.
The combination of Thr, Ile, Val, Trp, and Arg resulted 
in nearly complete BW recovery during each age.
DOI: 10.1093/ps/79.9.1299
PMID: 11020075 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Dietary Supplementation with Glutamate and Aspartate on Diquat-Induced Oxidative Stress in Piglets 1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 15;10(4):e0122893. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122893. 
eCollection 2015.

Effects of dietary supplementation with glutamate and aspartate on 
diquat-induced oxidative stress in piglets.

Yin J(1)
 Liu M(2), Ren W(1), Duan J(1), Yang G(3), Zhao Y(2), Fang R(2), Chen 
L(2), Li T(4), Yin Y(5).
Author information:
(1)Scientific Observing and Experimental Station of Animal Nutrition and Feed 
Science in South-Central, Ministry of Agriculture, Hunan Provincial Engineering 
Research Center of Healthy Livestock, Key Laboratory of Agro-ecological 
Processes in Subtropical Region, Institute of Subtropical Agriculture, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Changsha, Hunan, 410125, China; University of Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Beijing, 100039, China.
(2)Department of Animal Science, University of Hunan agriculture, Changsha, 
410128, China.
(3)Department of Animal Science, University of Florida, Gainesville, Florida, 
32610, United States of America.
(4)Scientific Observing and Experimental Station of Animal Nutrition and Feed 
Science in South-Central, Ministry of Agriculture, Hunan Provincial Engineering 
Research Center of Healthy Livestock, Key Laboratory of Agro-ecological 
Processes in Subtropical Region, Institute of Subtropical Agriculture, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Changsha, Hunan, 410125, China.
(5)Scientific Observing and Experimental Station of Animal Nutrition and Feed 
Science in South-Central, Ministry of Agriculture, Hunan Provincial Engineering 
Research Center of Healthy Livestock, Key Laboratory of Agro-ecological 
Processes in Subtropical Region, Institute of Subtropical Agriculture, Chinese 
Academy of Sciences, Changsha, Hunan, 410125, China; Southwest Collaborative 
Innovation Center of Swine for Quality & Safety, 211#211 Huiming Road, Wenjiang 
district, Chengdu, China.
This study aimed to investigate the protective effects of dietary glutamate and 
aspartate supplementations on diquat-induced oxidative stress in piglets.
Diquat 
injection significantly reduced growth performance, including body weight, 
average daily weight gain, and feed intake (P<0.05).
Meanwhile, diquat 
administration induced oxidative stress evidenced by the decreased serum nitric 
oxide (NO) and elevated malondialdeyhde (MDA) concentration (P<0.05).
Furthermore, diquat-induced oxidative stress disrupted intestinal absorption 
system and decreased serum threonine, serine, and glycine levels.
Dietary 
supplementation with glutamate improved final body weight, antioxidant system, 
and expressions of amino acids transporters and enhanced serum glutamate 
concentration compared with diquat group (P<0.05).
While aspartate failed to 
alleviate diquat-induced oxidative stress, growth depression, and dysfunction of 
nutrients absorption except for liver relative weight.
In conclusion, dietary 
supplementation with glutamate confers beneficial effects on diquat-induced 
oxidative stress in piglets, while aspartate exhibits little effects.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0122893
PMCID: PMC4398417
PMID: 25875335 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Plasticity of α2-adrenergic spinal antinociception following nerve injury: Selective
 bidirectional interaction with the delta opioid receptor 1.
Brain Res.
2015 Jan 12;1594:190-203. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.11.009.
Epub
 2014 Nov 15.
Plasticity of α2-adrenergic spinal antinociception following nerve injury: 
selective, bidirectional interaction with the delta opioid receptor.
Aira Z(1), Barrenetxea T(1), Buesa I(1), Azkue JJ(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
the Basque Country, PO Box 699, 48080 Bilbao, Spain.
(2)Department of Neurosciences, School of Medicine and Dentistry, University of 
the Basque Country, PO Box 699, 48080 Bilbao, Spain.
Electronic address: 
jonjatsu.azkue@ehu.es.
Interactions of opioid receptors with other receptor families can be made use of 
to improve analgesia and reduce adverse effects of opioid analgesics.
We 
investigated interactions of the α2-adrenergic receptor (α2AR) with opioid 
receptors of the mu (MOR) and delta (DOR) types in the spinal dorsal horn in an 
animal model of neuropathic pain induced by spinal nerve ligation.
Nine days 
after nerve injury, immunoreactivity for the α2AR subtype A (α2AAR) was 
increased both in tissue homogenates and at pre- and post-synaptic sites in 
transverse sections.
The efficacy of spinally administered α2AAR agonist 
guanfacine at reducing C-fiber-evoked field potentials was increased in 
nerve-ligated rats.
This reducing effect was impaired by simultaneous 
administration of DOR antagonist naltrindole, but not MOR antagonist CTOP, 
suggesting that concurrent DOR activation was required for α2AAR-mediated 
inhibition.
While DOR agonist deltorphin II and MOR agonist DAMGO both 
effectively depressed C-fiber-evoked spinal field potentials, DOR- but not 
MOR-mediated depression was enhanced by subclinical guanfacine.
In conscious, 
nerve-ligated rats, chronically administered deltorphin II produced stable 
thermal and mechanical antinociception over the 9 following days after nerve 
injury without apparent signs of habituation.
Such an effect was dramatically 
enhanced by co-administration of a low dose of guanfacine, which reversed 
thermal and mechanical thresholds to levels near those prior to injury.
The 
results suggest that spinal, α2AAR-mediated antinociception is increased after 
nerve injury and based on DOR co-activation.
We demonstrate in vivo that 
α2AAR/DOR interaction can be exploited to provide effective behavioral 
antinociception during neuropathic pain.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2014.11.009
PMID: 25446445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Influence of thiamine
 in vivo, on the thiaminase activity of guinea pig organs].
1.
Bull Soc Chim Biol (Paris).
1969 Jan 30;50(10):1791-6.
[Influence of thiamine, in vivo, on the thiaminase activity of guinea pig 
organs].
[Article in French]

Azevedo MD, Jacobsohn K, Rodrigues Cardoso M.

PMID: 5799151 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Production of Corneal Lesions Using High-Intensity Focused Ultrasound 1. Cornea. 1990 Oct;9(4):324-30.

Production of corneal lesions using high-intensity focused ultrasound.

Rutzen AR(1)
 Roberts CW, Driller J, Gomez D, Lucas BC, Lizzi FL, Coleman DJ.
Author information:
(1)Cornell University Medical College, Department of Ophthalmology, New York, 
New York 10021.
In order to study the potential use of ultrasound as a noninvasive system for 
altering corneal curvature, we used high-density focused ultrasound at a 
frequency of 4.8 MHz and 7.9 MHz to produce corneal lesions in the rabbit eye.
Intensity and duration threshold exposure conditions were determined for the 
production of minimally visible lesions.
Threshold lesions were initially 
apparent as discrete white opacities resulting from stromal edema and 
disruption.
Light and scanning electron microscopy of higher-energy, 
suprathreshold lesions revealed more extensive disruption, including the 
formation of a superficial stromal depression and a larger zone of edema and 
disorganization surrounding each lesion.
Posterior stromal lamellae, 
endothelium, and Descemet's membrane were intact.
Healing and 
reepithelialization resulted in a smooth corneal surface with no residual 
opacification.
Threshold determinations predict safe exposure levels to the 
cornea during insonification of other ocular structures.
Selective heating of 
the peripheral cornea using focused ultrasound may be a useful technique for 
correcting astigmatism.
PMID: 2078961 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Toxic Effects of Acute Glutathione Depletion by Buthionine Sulfoximine and Dimethylfumarate on Murine Mammary Carcinoma Cells 1. Radiat Res. 1988 May;114(2):215-24.

Toxic effects of acute glutathione depletion by buthionine sulfoximine and 
dimethylfumarate on murine mammary carcinoma cells.

Dethlefsen LA(1)
 Lehman CM, Biaglow JE, Peck VM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Radiology, University of Utah Health Sciences Center, Salt Lake 
City 84132.
Glutathione (GSH) depletion to approximately equal to 5% of control for 48 h or 
longer by 0.05 mM L-buthionine sulfoximine (BSO) led to appreciable toxicity for 
the 66 murine mammary carcinoma cells growing in vitro [L.A. Dethlefsen et al., 
Int.
J. Radiat.
Oncol.
Biol.
Phys.
12, 1157-1160 (1986)].
Such toxicity in 
normal, proliferating cells in vivo would be undesirable.
Thus the toxic effects 
after acute GSH depletion to approximately equal to 5% of control by BSO plus 
dimethylfumarate (DMF) were evaluated in these same 66 cells to determine if 
this anti-proliferative effect could be minimized.
Two hours of 0.025 mM DMF 
reduced GSH to 45% of control, while 6 h of 0.05 mM BSO reduced it to 16%.
However, BSO (6 h) plus DMF (2 h) and BSO (24 h) plus DMF (2 h) reduced GSH to 4 
and 2%, respectively.
The incorporation (15-min pulses) of radioactive 
precursors into protein and RNA were unaffected by these treatment protocols.
In 
contrast, cell growth was only modestly affected, but the incorporation of 
[3H]thymidine into DNA was reduced to 64% of control by the BSO (24 h) plus DMF 
(2 h) protocol even though it was unaffected by the BSO (6 h) plus DMF (2 h) 
treatment.
The cellular plating efficiencies from both protocols were reduced to 
approximately equal to 75% of control cells.
However, the aerobic radiation 
response, as measured by cell survival, was not modified at doses of either 4.0 
or 8.0 Gy.
The growth rates of treated cultures, after drug removal, quickly 
returned to control rates and the resynthesis of GSH in cells from both 
protocols was also rapid.
The GSH levels after either protocol were slightly 
above control by 12 h after drug removal, dramatically over control 
(approximately equal to 200%) by 24 h, and back to normal by 48 h. Thus even a 
relatively short treatment with BSO and DMF resulting in a GSH depletion to 2-5% 
of control had a marked effect on DNA synthesis and plating efficiency and a 
modest effect on cellular growth.
One cannot rule out a direct effect of the 
drugs, but presumably the antiproliferative effects are due to a depletion of 
nuclear GSH with the subsequent inhibition of the GSH/glutaredoxin-mediated 
conversion of ribonucleotides to deoxyribonucleotides.
However, even after 
extended treatment, upon drug removal, GSH was rapidly resynthesized and 
cellular DNA synthesis and growth quickly resumed.
PMID: 3375425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A novel analog of olanzapine linked to sarcosinyl moiety (PGW5) demonstrates high efficacy and good safety profile in mouse models of schizophrenia 1. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Mar;24(3):425-36. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.11.009. Epub 2013 Dec 16.

A novel analog of olanzapine linked to sarcosinyl moiety (PGW5) demonstrates 
high efficacy and good safety profile in mouse models of schizophrenia.

Gil-Ad I(1)
 Portnoy M(2), Tarasenko I(1), Bidder M(1), Kramer M(2), Taler M(1), 
Weizman A(3).
Author information:
(1)Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Campus Rabin, Sackler Faculty of 
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Petah Tikva 49100, Israel; Sackler Faculty of 
Medicine, Tel Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(2)School of Chemistry, Raymond and Beverly Sackler Faculty of Exact Sciences, 
Tel-Aviv University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
(3)Felsenstein Medical Research Center, Campus Rabin, Sackler Faculty of 
Medicine, Tel-Aviv University, Petah Tikva 49100, Israel; Research Unit, Geha 
Mental Health Center, Petah Tikva, Israel; Sackler Faculty of Medicine, Tel Aviv 
University, Tel Aviv, Israel.
Electronic address: aweizman@clalit.org.il.
Schizophrenia is a chronic mental disorder related to hypo-functioning of 
glutamatergic neurotransmission.
N-methyl-D-aspartate-receptor (NMDA-R) positive 
modulators were reported to reduce schizophrenia symptoms.
However, their 
efficacy is low and inconsistent.
We developed a novel antipsychotic possessing 
an olanzapine moiety linked to the positive modulator of glutamate NMDA-R 
sarcosine (PGW5) and characterized the pharmacodynamic properties of the novel 
molecule in-vivo using MK-801 and in-vitro using receptor binding analysis.
We 
investigated the pharmacological activity of PGW5 (olanzapine linked to 
sarcosinyl moiety) in male mice (BALB/c or C57BL).
In an open field test, up to 
50mg/kg PGW5 did not affect motility while higher doses were sedative.
PGW5 
(25-50mg/kg po) antagonized MK-801 (0.15 mg/kg ip) and amphetamine-induced 
(5mg/kg ip) hyperactivity.
PGW5 (25mg/kg po/d) treatment for 15 or 22 days 
exhibited antidepressant and anxiolytic activity in mice.
Moreover, PGW5, but 
not olanzapine, attenuated phencyclidine (PCP)-induced deficits of social 
preference in mice and promoted the expression of brain derived neurotrophic 
factor (BDNF) in the hippocampus and the frontal cortex and glutamic acid 
decarboxylase (GAD67) in the hippocampus.
Mice treated with PGW5 (25 and 
50mg/kg/d) for 28 days did not show toxic effects in terms of weight gain and 
blood-chemistry analysis.
CONCLUSIONS: PGW5 is a novel and safe antipsychotic, efficacious against 
schizophrenia-like positive and negative symptoms at nonsedative doses.
The drug 
shows anxiolytic and antidepressant activity, and improves impaired social 
performance in phencyclidine (PCP) treated mice.
The mechanism underlying its 
activity seems to involve potentiation of NMDA receptor as well as stimulation 
of brain BDNF and GAD67 expression.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. and ECNP.
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2013.11.009
PMID: 24389121 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition by melatonin of dopamine release from rat hypothalamus: regulation of calcium entry 1. Brain Res. 1983 Aug 8;272(2):378-81. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(83)90588-7.

Inhibition by melatonin of dopamine release from rat hypothalamus: regulation of 
calcium entry.

Zisapel N
 Laudon M.

The [Ca2+] dependency of dopamine release evoked by electrical field stimulation 
of hypothalamic tissue from female rats at the estrous stage was assessed in the 
presence of melatonin.
At concentrations of 10(-9)-10(-6) M, melatonin inhibited 
the [Ca2+]-dependent dopamine release.
Melatonin reduced tissue uptake of 45Ca2+ 
during stimulation either by an electrical field or by elevated K+ 
concentration.
About 90% of this inhibition by melatonin of 45Ca2+ uptake, as 
well as of dopamine release, was not observed in the presence of the calcium 
ionophore A23187.
Hence, the inhibitory effect on dopamine release by melatonin 
may stem from the reduction of calcium entry into the presynaptic nerve endings.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(83)90588-7
PMID: 6412963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Neuronal Surface and Glutamic Acid Decarboxylase Autoantibodies in Nonparaneoplastic Stiff Person Syndrome 1. JAMA Neurol. 2013 Sep 1;70(9):1140-9. doi: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3499.

Neuronal surface and glutamic acid decarboxylase autoantibodies in 
Nonparaneoplastic stiff person syndrome.

Chang T
 Alexopoulos H, McMenamin M, Carvajal-González A, Alexander SK, Deacon 
R, Erdelyi F, Szabó G, Lang B, Blaes F, Brown P, Vincent A.

Erratum in
    JAMA Neurol.
2014 Feb;71(2):244.
Gabor, Szabó [corrected to Szabó, Gabor].
IMPORTANCE: High titers of autoantibodies to glutamic acid decarboxylase (GAD) 
are well documented in association with stiff person syndrome (SPS).
Glutamic 
acid decarboxylase is the rate-limiting enzyme in the synthesis of 
γ-aminobutyric acid (GABA), and impaired function of GABAergic neurons has been 
implicated in the pathogenesis of SPS.
Autoantibodies to GAD might be the 
causative agent or a disease marker.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the characteristics and potential pathogenicity of GAD 
autoantibodies in patients with SPS and related disorders.
DESIGN: Retrospective cohort study and laboratory investigation.
SETTING: Weatherall Institute of Molecular Medicine, University of Oxford.
PARTICIPANTS: Twenty-five patients with SPS and related conditions identified 
from the Neuroimmunology Service.
EXPOSURES: Neurological examination, serological characterization and 
experimental studies.
MAIN OUTCOMES AND MEASURES: Characterization of serum GAD antibodies from 
patients with SPS and evidence for potential pathogenicity.
RESULTS: We detected GAD autoantibodies at a very high titer (median, 7500 U/mL) 
in 19 patients (76%), including all 12 patients with classic SPS.
The GAD 
autoantibodies were high affinity (antibody dissociation constant, 0.06-0.78 
nmol) and predominantly IgG1 subclass.
The patients’ autoantibodies co-localized 
with GAD on immunohistochemistry and in permeabilized cultured cerebellar 
GABAergic neurons, as expected, but they also bound to the cell surface of 
unpermeabilized GABAergic neurons.
Adsorption of the highest titer (700 000 
U/mL) serum with recombinant GAD indicated that these neuronal surface 
antibodies were not directed against GAD itself.
Although intraperitoneal 
injection of IgG purified from the 2 available GAD autoantibody–ositive purified 
IgG preparations did not produce clinical or pathological evidence of disease, 
SPS and control IgG were detected in specific regions of the mouse central 
nervous system, particularly around the lateral and fourth ventricles.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: Autoantibodies to GAD are associated with antibodies 
that bind to the surface of GABAergic neurons and that could be pathogenic.
Moreover, in mice, human IgG from the periphery gained access to relevant areas 
in the hippocampus and brainstem.
Identification of the target of the non-GAD 
antibodies and peripheral and intrathecal transfer protocols, combined with 
adsorption studies, should be used to demonstrate the role of the non-GAD IgG in 
SPS.
DOI: 10.1001/jamaneurol.2013.3499
PMCID: PMC6055982
PMID: 23877118 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Disclosures: Dr Vincent and 
the University of Oxford hold patents and receive royalties and payments for 
antibody tests, but these do not apply to GAD antibodies.
Natriuresis Induced by Alpha and Beta Melanocyte Stimulating Hormone (MSH) in Rats 1. Endocrinology. 1972 Mar;90(3):700-6. doi: 10.1210/endo-90-3-700.

Natriuresis induced by alpha and beta melanocyte stimulating hormone (MSH) in 
rats.

Orias R
 McCann SM.
DOI: 10.1210/endo-90-3-700
PMID: 5009346 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sequential Development of Long-Term Potentiation and Depression in Different Layers of the Mouse Visual Cortex <jats:p>Visual deprivation affects the responses of layer IV cells more prominently during early postnatal development
 whereas responses in layer II/III remain modifiable until later ages.
We examined whether these laminar differences correlate with changes in long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term depression (LTD) of the ascending pathways to layers IV and II/III in the mouse visual cortex.
Our analysis revealed that LTP and LTD in layer IV principal cells is lost shortly after the eyes open, but persists in layers II/III beyond puberty.
These results suggest that plasticity proceeds sequentially through cortical layers in a manner that parallels the flow of information during sensory processing.</jats:p>
Role of Endocannabinoids and Cannabinoid-1 Receptors in Cerebrocortical Blood Flow Regulation 1. PLoS One. 2013;8(1):e53390. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053390. Epub 2013 Jan
4.

Role of endocannabinoids and cannabinoid-1 receptors in cerebrocortical blood 
flow regulation.

Iring A(1)
 Ruisanchez É, Leszl-Ishiguro M, Horváth B, Benkő R, Lacza Z, Járai 
Z, Sándor P, Di Marzo V, Pacher P, Benyó Z.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Human Physiology and Clinical Experimental Research, Semmelweis 
University, Budapest, Hungary.
BACKGROUND: Endocannabinoids are among the most intensively studied lipid 
mediators of cardiovascular functions.
In the present study the effects of 
decreased and increased activity of the endocannabinoid system (achieved by 
cannabinoid-1 (CB1) receptor blockade and inhibition of cannabinoid reuptake, 
respectively) on the systemic and cerebral circulation were analyzed under 
steady-state physiological conditions and during hypoxia and hypercapnia (H/H).
METHODOLOGY/PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: In anesthetized spontaneously ventilating rats 
the CB1-receptor antagonist/inverse agonist AM-251 (10 mg/kg, i.v.)
failed to 
influence blood pressure (BP), cerebrocortical blood flow (CoBF, measured by 
laser-Doppler flowmetry) or arterial blood gas levels.
In contrast, the putative 
cannabinoid reuptake inhibitor AM-404 (10 mg/kg, i.v.)
induced triphasic 
responses, some of which could be blocked by AM-251.
Hypertension during phase I 
was resistant to AM-251, whereas the concomitant CoBF-increase was attenuated.
In contrast, hypotension during phase III was sensitive to AM-251, whereas the 
concomitant CoBF-decrease was not.
Therefore, CoBF autoregulation appeared to 
shift towards higher BP levels after CB1-blockade.
During phase II H/H developed 
due to respiratory depression, which could be inhibited by AM-251.
Interestingly, however, the concomitant rise in CoBF remained unchanged after 
AM-251, indicating that CB1-blockade potentially enhanced the reactivity of the 
CoBF to H/H.
In accordance with this hypothesis, AM-251 induced a significant 
enhancement of the CoBF responses during controlled stepwise H/H.
CONCLUSION/SIGNIFICANCE: Under resting physiological conditions CB1-receptor 
mediated mechanisms appear to have limited influence on systemic or cerebral 
circulation.
Enhancement of endocannabinoid levels, however, induces transient 
CB1-independent hypertension and sustained CB1-mediated hypotension.
Furthermore, enhanced endocannabinoid activity results in respiratory depression 
in a CB1-dependent manner.
Finally, our data indicate for the first time the 
involvement of the endocannabinoid system and CB1-receptors in the regulation of 
the cerebral circulation during H/H and also raise the possibility of their 
contribution to the autoregulation of CoBF.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0053390
PMCID: PMC3537620
PMID: 23308211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
In vivo exposure of young adult male rats to methoxychlor reduces serum testosterone levels and ex vivo Leydig cell testosterone formation and cholesterol side-chain cleavage activity 1. Reprod Toxicol. 2006 Feb;21(2):148-53. doi: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2005.08.005.
Epub  2005 Oct 12.

In vivo exposure of young adult male rats to methoxychlor reduces serum 
testosterone levels and ex vivo Leydig cell testosterone formation and 
cholesterol side-chain cleavage activity.

Murono EP(1)
 Derk RC, Akgul Y.
Author information:
(1)Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, National Institute for 
Occupational Safety and Health, Health Effects Laboratory Division, Pathology 
and Physiology Research Branch, M/S L-2015, 1095 Willowdale Road, Morgantown, WV 
26505-2888, USA.
eem8@cdc.gov

Methoxychlor (MC) was developed as a replacement for the banned pesticide DDT.
After in vivo administration, it is metabolized in the liver to 
2,2-bis(p-hydroxyphenyl)-1,1,1-trichloroethane (HPTE), which is proposed to be 
the active agent.
Both MC and HPTE have been shown to exhibit weak estrogenic 
and antiandrogenic activities, and they are thought to exert their effects 
through estrogen and androgen receptors, respectively.
Although in vitro studies 
using cultured rat Leydig cells have reported that HPTE inhibits both basal and 
hCG-stimulated testosterone formation, the response of circulating testosterone 
levels to in vivo MC has been more variable.
Therefore, the current studies 
evaluated whether the daily in vivo administration of MC (0, 5, 40 and 200 mg/kg 
body weight) for a short duration (days 54-60 of age) by gavage altered serum 
testosterone levels and ex vivo Leydig cell testosterone formation in young 
adult male rats.
These results demonstrate that both fluid-retained and 
fluid-expressed seminal vesicle weights declined to 44 and 60% of control, 
respectively, in the 200 mg/kg MC-exposed animals.
Similarly, serum testosterone 
and dehydroepiandrosterone levels declined to 41 and 45% of control, 
respectively, in the 200 mg/kg MC-exposed animals; however, serum LH and FSH 
levels were unaffected.
Ex vivo Leydig cell basal testosterone formation over 4h 
declined to 49% of control in animals exposed to 200 mg/kg MC, and ex vivo 
Leydig cell P450 cholesterol side-chain cleavage activity declined to 79 and 50% 
of control in animals exposed to 40 and 200 mg/kg of MC, respectively, 
supporting previous in vitro studies which demonstrated the sensitivity of this 
step to MC.
DOI: 10.1016/j.reprotox.2005.08.005
PMID: 16226009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Alterations in glutamate dehydrogenase of the brain of rats of various ages <jats:p> The activity of glutamate dehydrogenase of the brain of 6-
 22-, 52-, and 96-week-old rats was determined.
The specific activity, units per milligram DNA and units per organ, increased with growth and was highest at 22 weeks.
This was probably due to a higher rate of protein synthesis during growth since the total DNA content did not change during this period.
The activity declined in old age.
Some biogenic amines, endogenous to nervous tissue and possibly having neurotransmitter functions, such as 5-hydroxy-tryptamine (5-HT), acetylcholine (ACh), and norepinephrine (NEp), inhibited enzyme activity; epinephrine (Ep) stimulated enzyme activity at all ages.
Studies on the effects of various concentrations of the transmitters showed that the concentrations of 5-HT, ACh, NEp, and Ep producing significant regulatory effects on the enzyme may be 0.048, 0.18, 0.05, and 0.025 mg/ml, respectively.
</jats:p>
Guanidine and 2-Aminoimidazoline Aromatic Derivatives as α<sub>2</sub>-Adrenoceptor Antagonists
 1:  Toward New Antidepressants with Heteroatomic Linkers 1.
J Med Chem.
2007 Sep 6;50(18):4516-27. doi: 10.1021/jm070229q.
Epub 2007 Aug
10.
Guanidine and 2-aminoimidazoline aromatic derivatives as alpha(2)-adrenoceptor 
antagonists, 1: toward new antidepressants with heteroatomic linkers.
Rodriguez F(1), Rozas I, Ortega JE, Meana JJ, Callado LF.
Author information:
(1)Centre for Synthesis and Chemical Biology, School of Chemistry, University of 
Dublin, Trinity College, Dublin 2, Ireland.
The efficient preparation and pharmacological characterization of different 
families of (bis)guanidine and (bis)2-aminoimidazoline derivatives ("twin" and 
"half" molecules) as potential alpha(2)-adrenoceptor antagonists for the 
treatment of depression is presented.
The affinity toward the 
alpha(2)-adrenoceptor of all the compounds prepared was measured in vitro in 
human brain tissue.
Additionally, the activity as agonist or antagonist of those 
compounds with a pK(i) larger than 7 was determined in functional 
[(35)S]GTPgammaS binding assays in human brain tissue.
Finally, the activity of 
the most promising compounds was confirmed by means of in vivo microdialysis 
experiments in rats.
Compounds 1, 2b, 3b, 12b, 13b, 17b, 18b, 22b, 25b, 26b, 
28b, and 30 showed a good affinity toward the alpha(2)-ARs.
In general, the 
2-aminoimidazoline derivatives displayed higher affinities than their guanidine 
analogues.
Finally and most importantly, compounds 18b and 26b showed 
antagonistic properties over alpha(2)-ARs not only in vitro [(35)S]GTPgammaS 
binding but also in vivo microdialysis experiments.
Moreover, both compounds 
have shown to be able to cross the blood-brain barrier and, therefore, they can 
be considered as potential antidepressants.
DOI: 10.1021/jm070229q
PMID: 17691718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of 2-aminobutan-1-ols on the growth of the housefly (Musca domestica) 1. Comp Biochem Physiol. 1968 May;25(2):383-400. doi:
10.1016/0010-406x(68)90348-4.

The effect of 2-aminobutan-1-ols on the growth of the housefly (Musca 
domestica).

Bridges RG
 Ricketts J.

DOI: 10.1016/0010-406x(68)90348-4
PMID: 5653696 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Flow-force relationships during energy transfer between mitochondrial proton pumps 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1991 Jun 17;1058(2):297-303. doi: 
10.1016/s0005-2728(05)80250-6.

Flow-force relationships during energy transfer between mitochondrial proton 
pumps.

Petronilli V(1)
 Persson B, Zoratti M, Rydström J, Azzone GF.
Author information:
(1)CNR Unit for the Physiology of Mitochondria, University of Padova, Italy.
The effect of inhibitors of proton pumps, of uncouplers and of permeant ions on 
the relationship between input force, delta mu H+, and output flows of the 
ATPase, redox and transhydrogenase H(+)-pumps in submitochondrial particles was 
investigated.
It is concluded that: (1) The decrease of output flow of the 
transhydrogenase proton pump, defined as the rate of reduction of NADP+ by NADH, 
is linearily correlated with the decrease of input force, delta mu H+, in an 
extended range of delta mu H+, independently of whether the H(+)-generating pump 
is the ATPase or a redox pump, or whether delta mu H+ is depressed by inhibitors 
of the H(+)-generating pump such as oligomycin or malonate, or by uncouplers.
(2) The output flows of the ATPase and of the site I redox H(+)-pumps exhibit a 
steep dependence on delta mu H+.
The flow-force relationships differ depending 
on whether the depression of delta mu H+ is induced by inhibitors of the 
H(+)-generating pump, by uncouplers or by lipophilic anions.
(3) With the ATPase 
as H(+)-consuming pump, at equivalent delta mu H+ values, the output flow is 
more markedly inhibited by malonate than by uncouplers; the latter, however, are 
more inhibitory than lipophilic anions such as ClO4-.
With redox site I as 
proton-consuming pump, at equivalent delta mu H+ values, the output flow is more 
markedly inhibited by oligomycin than by uncouplers; again, uncouplers are more 
inhibitory than ClO4-.
(4) The results provide further support for a delocalized 
interaction of transhydrogenase with other H(+)-pumps.
DOI: 10.1016/s0005-2728(05)80250-6
PMID: 1646634 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The behavioural effects of an N-methylaspartate receptor antagonist following application to the lumbar spinal cord of conscious rats 1. Neuropharmacology. 1984 Jul;23(7A):719-24. doi: 10.1016/0028-3908(84)90102-3.

The behavioural effects of an N-methylaspartate receptor antagonist following 
application to the lumbar spinal cord of conscious rats.

Cahusac PM
 Evans RH, Hill RG, Rodriquez RE, Smith DA.
The selective N-methylaspartate (NMA) receptor antagonist 
2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoate (AP5) has been applied to the lumbar region of the 
spinal cord in conscious rats through chronically implanted intrathecal 
cannulae.
Administration of AP5 was compared with administration of 
2-amino-4-phosphonobutyrate (AP4), morphine and control injections.
Intrathecal 
injection of AP5 (250 nmol) produced extensor paralysis in the hindquarters and 
depression of aversive responses to tail heat (54 degrees C), paw heat (hotplate 
56.5 degrees C) and paw pressure.
Depression of AP5 of the vocal response to 
aversive electrical stimuli, applied to the tail, suggested that AP5 produced 
analgesia independently of locomotor paralysis.
Intrathecal injection of 
morphine (20-30 nmol) produced no observed locomotor effects, but depressed 
responses to all the aversive stimuli.
Intrathecal injection of AP4 had no 
significant effects.
When tritiated AP5 was administered intrathecally, the 
proportion of radioactivity recovered from the lumbar spinal cord suggested that 
the concentration of AP5, which produced locomotor depression and analgesia, was 
likely to have been in the range (15-75 microM) known to depress excitatory 
transmission in isolated spinal cord preparations.
It is concluded that synaptic 
activation of n-methylaspartate receptors is important in spinal pathways which 
control locomotion, posture and central transmission of nociceptive information.
DOI: 10.1016/0028-3908(84)90102-3
PMID: 6147787 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Further Studies on the Replication of the Lactate Dehydrogenase-Elevating Virus (LDH Virus) in Mouse Peritoneal Macrophage Cultures 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1970 Mar;133(3):831-6. doi: 10.3181/00379727-133-34574.

Further studies on the replication of the lactate dehydrogenase-elevating virus 
(LDH virus) in mouse peritoneal macrophage cultures.

Evans R.

DOI: 10.3181/00379727-133-34574
PMID: 5435576 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of damage of the nigro-neostriatal dopaminergic system by MPTP on the transmission of corticofugal impulses to the neurons of the caudate nucleus]. 1. Fiziol Zh (1978). 1989 Nov-Dec;35(6):33-9.

[Effect of damage of the nigro-neostriatal dopaminergic system by MPTP on the 
transmission of corticofugal impulses to the neurons of the caudate nucleus].

[Article in Russian]

Oleshko NN.

It is shown in acute experiments on cats (males) that the induced responses as 
action potentials (AP) by the latent period (LP) less than 8.0 ms in the caudate 
nucleus neurons (CN) to a single stimulation of the motor zone of the cortex 
(MI) are more frequently inhibited than facilitated after specifying single 
stimulation of the compact part of the black substance (BS) in the intervals 
between stimuli 10-100 ms. As a result of system multiple injection of MPTP 
neurotoxin during 5 days per 5 mg/kg the number of CN neurons responding to 
stimulation of MI
 AP, LP less than 8.0 Usec and to stimulation of BS-LP less 
than 10.0 ms reliably decreases.
A conclusion is made that dopaminergic 
nigro-striatum system exerts a protective action on the impulse transfer on 
monosynaptic connections from the cortex to striatum.
PMID: 2558913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Acute and chronic tolerance to nicotine measured by activity in rats 1. Psychopharmacologia. 1973 Jun 29;30(4):329-42. doi: 10.1007/BF00429192.

Acute and chronic tolerance to nicotine measured by activity in rats.

Stolerman IP
 Fink R, Jarvik ME.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00429192
PMID: 4722204 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inbreeding Depression in Insular and Central Populations of Peromyscus Mice 1. J Hered. 1990 Jul-Aug;81(4):257-66. doi:
10.1093/oxfordjournals.jhered.a110988.

Inbreeding depression in insular and central populations of Peromyscus mice.

Brewer BA(1)
 Lacy RC, Foster ML, Alaks G.

Author information:
(1)Chicago Zoological Park, Brookfield, Illinois 60513.
We tested the hypothesis that small, isolated populations would show less 
depression in fitness when inbred than would large, central populations.
Laboratory stocks of Peromyscus leucopus and P. polionotus were established from 
insular, peninsular, and central populations.
The isolated populations had 
one-third to one-half the genic diversity of central populations.
Responses to 
inbreeding were highly varied: some populations had smaller litters, others 
experienced higher mortality, some showed slower growth rates, and one displayed 
no measurable effects when inbred.
These results suggest that inbreeding 
depression is controlled by a small number of genes and that the size of the 
genetic load depends on which alleles are present in the founders of a 
population.
The severity of fitness depression in inbred litters did not 
correlate with initial genic diversity of the stocks nor, therefore, with the 
size of the wild populations.
Fitness measures appeared linearly related to the 
inbreeding coefficient of the liters, with no diminution of deleterious effects 
through subsequent generations of inbreeding.
Thus overdominance of fitness 
traits probably contributed as much to the genetic load as did deleterious 
recessive alleles.
The inbreeding level of the dam negatively affected the size, 
growth, and survival of litters only in genetically diverse populations, 
indicating that the load of recessive alleles negatively impacting maternal care 
may have been reduced by selection in the more peripheral populations during 
past bottlenecks.
DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jhered.a110988
PMID: 2273239 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In vitro neurotransmitter release in an animal model of depression 1. Neurochem Int. 1992 Jul;21(1):29-35. doi: 10.1016/0197-0186(92)90065-y.

In vitro neurotransmitter release in an animal model of depression.

Edwards E(1)
 Kornrich W, van Houtten P, Henn FA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Science, State University of New 
York, Stony Brook.
Sprague-Dawley rats exposed to uncontrollable shock can be separated by a 
subsequent shock escape test into two groups: a "helpless" (LH) group which 
demonstrates a deficit in escape behavior, and a "nonlearned helpless" (NLH) 
group which shows no escape deficit and acquires the escape response as readily 
as naive control rats (NC) do.
The present studies were designed to examine the 
correlations between the behavioral differences and the changes of in vitro 
neurotransmitter release seen in these three groups of rats.
The major finding 
concerned a significant increase in endogenous and K(+)-stimulated serotonin 
(5-HT) release in the hippocampal slices of LH rats.
There were no apparent 
differences in acetylcholine, dopamine and noradrenaline release in the 
hippocampus of LH rats as compared to NLH and NC rats.
These results add further 
support to previous studies in our laboratory which implicate presynaptic 5-HT 
mechanisms in the behavioral deficit caused by uncontrollable shock.
DOI: 10.1016/0197-0186(92)90065-y
PMID: 1303140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of amiloride on sodium and water reabsorption in the rabbit gall‐bladder. <jats:p>The effects of the Na+‐channel‐blocking diuretic agent amiloride were assessed in the rabbit gall‐bladder epithelium
 a low‐resistance epithelium with an isosmotic, coupled NaCl transport mechanism.
Amiloride caused a rapid, reversible, and dose‐dependent decrease in fluid absorption when applied from the mucosal side in concentrations between 8.8 X 10(‐5) and 1.76 X 10(‐3) M. These concentrations were without effect from the serosal side, suggesting an action of amiloride in the luminal cell membrane as in high‐resistance epithelia.
Amiloride did not affect the epithelial resistance or the passive serosa‐to‐mucosa Na+ flux, while net Na+ and water reabsorption were inhibited in parallel.
Thus, amiloride did not affect the paracellular tight junction pathway, but inhibited a transcellular, coupled salt and water transport mechanism.
The kinetics of the amiloride effect were of a Michaelis‐Menten type.
The dose of amiloride giving 50% inhibition of fluid absorption (ID50) was 4 X 10(‐4) M, a value about three orders of magnitude higher than in high‐resistance, Na+‐retaining epithelia.
The percentage inhibitory effect at each concentration of amiloride increased with increasing rate of spontaneous (control) fluid transport, reaching maximal responses fitting a Michaelis‐Menten kinetic with an ID50 of 1.5 X 10(‐4) M. No effects of changing the extracellular Na+ concentration between 51 and 145 mequiv/l on the maximal inhibitory effect of amiloride on Na+ and water reabsorption were observed.
This suggests a non‐competitive type of action of amiloride on a Na+‐dependent isosmotic fluid transport mechanism.
Removal of mucosal Ca2+ did not alter the effect of amiloride.
The implications of these findings are discussed in relation to concepts concerning the mechanism of isosmotic salt and water transport.
The data are compatible with the concept that amiloride interferes with a Na+‐dependent formation and transcellular transport of isosmotic fluid volumes in a sequestered compartment in the epithelial cells.</jats:p>
[Blocking effect of cycloheximide on decreased mitochondrial resistance due to thyroid hormone action]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1985 May;99(5):540-2.

[Blocking effect of cycloheximide on decreased mitochondrial resistance due to 
thyroid hormone action].

[Article in Russian]

Marzoev AI
 Turchina SL, tnikov VA.

Administration of cycloheximide (20-25 micrograms/kg bw twice, interval 24 h) to 
hyperthyroid rats (300 micrograms/T4/100 g bw i. p. 48 h before sacrifice) 
inhibited the decrease in mitochondrial resistance to Ca2+ characteristic of 
hyperthyroidism.
It was established in particular that calcium capacitance of 
the mitochondria and the time of the maintenance of transmembrane potential of 
these organelles under calcium loading were increased in the mitochondria of 
hyperthyroid animals given cycloheximide as compared with analogous parameters 
of the organelles of intact hyperthyroid rats.
Moreover, the fluorescence 
intensity of NADPH in the mitochondria of the first group of animals was 37% 
greater and the rate of oxidation of these nucleotides several times lower than 
in the organelles of the second group animals.
It is assumed that the described 
effects of cycloheximide on the mitochondria are linked with the inhibitory 
effect of the antibiotic on endogenous activity of mitochondrial phospholipase 
A2.
PMID: 4005406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of Na+/H+ Exchanger Type 3 Reduces Duration of Apnea Induced by Laryngeal Stimulation in Piglets 1. Pediatr Res. 2002 Sep;52(3):459-64. doi: 10.1203/00006450-200209000-00026.

Inhibition of Na(+)/H(+) exchanger type 3 reduces duration of apnea induced by 
laryngeal stimulation in piglets.

Abu-Shaweesh JM(1)
 Dreshaj IA, Martin RJ, Wirth KJ, Heinelt U, Haxhiu MA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics, Case Western Reserve University Cleveland, Ohio 
44106, USA.
jxa16@po.cwru.edu

Reflexes from the larynx induce cessation of breathing in newborn animals.
The 
magnitude of respiratory inhibition is inversely related to the level of central 
chemical input.
Recent studies indicate that selective inhibition of Na(+)/H(+) 
exchanger type 3 (NHE3) activates CO(2)/H(+)-sensitive neurons, resembling the 
responses evoked by hypercapnic stimuli.
Hence, the use of NHE3 inhibitors may 
reduce reflexly mediated respiratory depression and duration of apnea in the 
neonatal period.
This possibility was examined in decerebrate, vagotomized, 
ventilated, and paralyzed piglets by testing the effects of i.v.
administration 
of NHE3 blocker S8218 on the response of phrenic nerve amplitude, frequency, and 
duration of apnea induced by graded electrical stimulation of the superior 
laryngeal nerve.
Superior laryngeal nerve stimulation caused a significant 
decrease in phrenic nerve amplitude, frequency, minute phrenic activity, and 
inspiratory time (all p < 0.01) that was proportional to the level of electrical 
stimulation.
Increased levels of stimulation were more likely to induce apnea 
both during and after cessation of stimulation.
NHE3 blocker S8218 reduced the 
superior laryngeal nerve stimulation-induced decrease in phrenic nerve 
amplitude, minute phrenic activity, and phrenic nerve frequency (all p < 0.05) 
and reduced superior laryngeal nerve stimulation-induced apnea and duration of 
poststimulation apnea (p < 0.05).
In six other pigs the brain concentrations of 
S8218 were measured at different intervals after i.v.
administration of the drug 
and were found to be higher in the brain tissue than plasma at all intervals.
These findings suggest that the use of NHE3 blockers may decrease the duration 
of apnea and possibly reduce the pathophysiologic consequences of potentially 
life-threatening apnea in infants.
DOI: 10.1203/00006450-200209000-00026
PMID: 12193685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Modulation of epileptiform activity by glutamine and system A transport in a model of post-traumatic epilepsy 1. Neurobiol Dis. 2007 Feb;25(2):230-8. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2006.08.025. Epub 2006
 Oct 27.

Modulation of epileptiform activity by glutamine and system A transport in a 
model of post-traumatic epilepsy.

Tani H(1)
 Bandrowski AE, Parada I, Wynn M, Huguenard JR, Prince DA, Reimer RJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Stanford University Medical Center, Stanford, CA 
94305, USA.
Epileptic activity arises from an imbalance in excitatory and inhibitory 
synaptic transmission.
To determine if alterations in the metabolism of 
glutamate, the primary excitatory neurotransmitter, might contribute to epilepsy 
we directly and indirectly modified levels of glutamine, an immediate precursor 
of synaptically released glutamate, in the rat neocortical undercut model of 
hyperexcitability and epilepsy.
We show that slices from injured cortex take up 
glutamine more readily than control slices, and an increased expression of the 
system A transporters SNAT1 and SNAT2 likely underlies this difference.
We also 
examined the effect of exogenous glutamine on evoked and spontaneous activity 
and found that addition of physiological concentrations of glutamine to 
perfusate of slices isolated from injured cortex increased the incidence and 
decreased the refractory period of epileptiform potentials.
By contrast, 
exogenous glutamine increased the amplitude of evoked potentials in normal 
cortex, but did not induce epileptiform potentials.
Addition of physiological 
concentrations of glutamine to perfusate of slices isolated from injured cortex 
greatly increased abnormal spontaneous activity in the form of events resembling 
spreading depression, again while having no effect on slices from normal cortex.
Interestingly, similar spreading depression like events were noted in control 
slices at supraphysiological levels of glutamine.
In the undercut cortex 
addition of methylaminoisobutyric acid (MeAIB), an inhibitor of the system A 
glutamine transporters attenuated all physiological effects of added glutamine 
suggesting that uptake through these transporters is required for the effect of 
glutamine.
Our findings support a role for glutamine transport through SNAT1 
and/or SNAT2 in the maintenance of abnormal activity in this in vitro model of 
epileptogenesis and suggest that system A transport and glutamine metabolism are 
potential targets for pharmacological intervention in seizures and epilepsy.
DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2006.08.025
PMCID: PMC1952182
PMID: 17070687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Prepro-thyrotropin releasing hormone 178-199 immunoreactivity is altered in the hypothalamus of the Wistar–Kyoto strain of rat 1. Brain Res. 2001 Sep 21;913(2):224-33. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02853-0.

Prepro-thyrotropin releasing hormone 178-199 immunoreactivity is altered in the 
hypothalamus of the Wistar-Kyoto strain of rat.

Suzuki S(1)
 Solberg LC, Redei EE, Handa RJ.
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Program, Loyola University Medical Center, Maywood, IL 60153, 
USA.
The rat prepro-thyrotropin releasing hormone (TRH) 178-199 is derived from 
prepro-TRH by the actions of the endopeptidases, prohormone convertase 1 (PC1) 
and PC2.
PPTRH 178-199 attenuates the synthesis and secretion of 
adrenocorticotropic hormone (ACTH) from the anterior pituitary both in vitro and 
in vivo, suggesting an inhibitory action on hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) 
axis function.
This peptide also acts centrally to increase activity and 
decrease anxiety related behaviors.
To elucidate the involvement of this peptide 
in these functions, we have compared the expression of PPTRH 178-199, PPTRH 
mRNA, and PC1 and PC2 mRNAs in the Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) and Wistar strains of rat.
WKY rats have been shown to possess neuroendocrine abnormalities (HPA 
hyper-activity) and hyper-emotional behavioral characteristics.
Immunohistochemical analysis of PPTRH 178-199 demonstrated significant strain 
differences in the paraventricular nucleus (PVN) of the hypothalamus and the 
parastrial nucleus (PSN).
WKY rats had significantly greater numbers of 
immunoreactive (IR) cell body profiles (P<0.0005) than Wistar rats in the PVN 
and a significantly lower fiber density (P<0.002) in the PSN.
Levels of PPTRH, 
PC1, and PC2 mRNA were not different between strains in any brain region 
examined.
These data suggest that altered levels of PPTRH 178-199 in WKY rats 
could cause, at least in part, the hyper-activity of the HPA axis and the 
hyper-emotional behavioral characteristics seen in this rat strain.
Such data 
fit with the hypothesis that PPTRH 178-199 is involved in the regulation of the 
HPA axis and behavior.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02853-0
PMID: 11549391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic Administration of Imipramine and Lithium Changes the Phase-Angle Relationship Between the Activity and Core Body Temperature Circadian Rhythms in Rats 1. Chronobiol Int. 1996 Oct;13(4):251-9. doi: 10.3109/07420529609020905.

Chronic administration of imipramine and lithium changes the phase-angle 
relationship between the activity and core body temperature circadian rhythms in 
rats.

Nagayama H(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry
 Oita Medical University, Japan.
Evidence suggests that there is an association between the pathophysiology of 
depression and a disturbance of circadian rhythms.
Accordingly, attention has 
focused on the possible effects of antidepressants on circadian rhythms.
In the 
present study, we examined the effects of chronic administration of two 
clinically effective antidepressant agents, imipramine and lithium, on several 
circadian rhythms in the rat.
Activity, core body temperature, and drinking 
rhythms were assessed in constant darkness (DD) and light-dark (LD) conditions.
In DD, lithium significantly lengthened the circadian period of the activity, 
temperature, and drinking rhythms, while imipramine had no effect.
In LD, both 
drugs significantly delayed the phase of the activity rhythm, but did not change 
that of the other two rhythms.
As a result, the phase-angle differences between 
the activity and temperature rhythms significantly increased.
Neither lithium 
nor imipramine produced any effect on the resynchronization of these rhythms 
after an 8-h delay in the LD cycle.
These results indicate that although both 
drugs produced different effects on the circadian period of individual rhythms, 
both caused a relative phase advance of the temperature rhythm as compared to 
the activity rhythm, and this effect may be related to the similarity in their 
antidepressant effects.
DOI: 10.3109/07420529609020905
PMID: 8889249 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Social isolation stress induces ATF-7 phosphorylation and impairs silencing of the 5-HT 5B receptor gene 1. EMBO J. 2010 Jan 6;29(1):196-208. doi: 10.1038/emboj.2009.318. Epub 2009 Nov
5.

Social isolation stress induces ATF-7 phosphorylation and impairs silencing of 
the 5-HT 5B receptor gene.

Maekawa T(1)
 Kim S, Nakai D, Makino C, Takagi T, Ogura H, Yamada K, Chatton B, 
Ishii S.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Molecular Genetics, RIKEN Tsukuba Institute, Tsukuba, Ibaraki, 
Japan.
maekawa@rtc.riken.jp

Many symptoms induced by isolation rearing of rodents may be relevant to 
neuropsychiatric disorders, including depression.
However, identities of 
transcription factors that regulate gene expression in response to chronic 
social isolation stress remain elusive.
The transcription factor ATF-7 is 
structurally related to ATF-2, which is activated by various stresses, including 
inflammatory cytokines.
Here, we report that Atf-7-deficient mice exhibit 
abnormal behaviours and increased 5-HT receptor 5B (Htr5b) mRNA levels in the 
dorsal raphe nuclei.
ATF-7 silences the transcription of Htr5B by directly 
binding to its 5'-regulatory region, and mediates histone H3-K9 trimethylation 
via interaction with the ESET histone methyltransferase.
Isolation-reared 
wild-type (WT) mice exhibit abnormal behaviours that resemble those of 
Atf-7-deficient mice.
Upon social isolation stress, ATF-7 in the dorsal raphe 
nucleus is phosphorylated via p38 and is released from the Htr5b promoter, 
leading to the upregulation of Htr5b.
Thus, ATF-7 may have a critical role in 
gene expression induced by social isolation stress.
DOI: 10.1038/emboj.2009.318
PMCID: PMC2808367
PMID: 19893493 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare that they have no conflict 
of interest.
La génistéine réprime l’induction des bourgeons prostatiques par la testostérone 1. J Soc Biol. 2000;194(2):95-7.

[[Genistein represses the induction of prostatic buds by testosterone] ].

[Article in French]

Saito M(1)
 Mitsui T, Mizuno T.

Author information:
(1)Département de Sciences fondamentales pour Pharmacie, Faculté des Sciences 
pharmaceutiques, Teikyo Université, Kanagawa-ken, Japan.
Genistein, a phytoestrogen and a kind of endocrine disrupters, inhibits 
tyrosine-specific protein kinase activity of the epidermal growth factor (EGF) 
receptor.
It is also effective both in the suppression of the prostatic cell 
proliferation and the prostate carcinogenesis.
We have recently demonstrated 
that several growth factors, like EGF, transforming growth factor-alpha 
(TGF-alpha), or keratinocyte growth factor (KGF), can induce prostatic bud 
formation in the absence of androgen.
The present study was performed to 
investigate whether genistein can suppress testosterone-induced prostatic bud 
formation.
Urogenital sinuses of 16.5-day male rat fetuses were cultured 
organotypically for 5 days in a serum-free medium containing 10 or 100 ng/ml 
genistein and 50 ng/ml testosterone.
The number and total volume of prostatic 
buds were analyzed by laser scanning microscopy and computerized.
We found that 
genistein inhibits significantly testosterone-induced prostatic bud formation.
In the presence of genistein, cell proliferation of the sinus epithelium was 
suppressed and the number of prostatic buds and total volume of the buds were 
reduced as compared with those in the sinuses cultured with testosterone alone.
Genistein did not appear to cause necrosis of the sinus.
These results support 
our hypothesis that growth factors like EGF secreted from the sinus mesenchyme 
activated by testosterone are involved in the induction and stimulation of 
growth of the prostatic buds.
PMID: 11098434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Direct Chronotropic and Dromotropic Actions of Contrast Media: Ineffectiveness of Atropine in the Prevention of Bradyarrhythmias and Conduction Disturbances 1. Radiology. 1976 Oct;121(1):205-9. doi: 10.1148/121.1.205.

Direct chronotropic and dromotropic actions of contrast media: ineffectiveness 
of atropine in the prevention of bradyarrhythmias and conduction disturbances.

Higgins CB
 Feld GK.
Methyl glucamine sodium diatrizoate (Renografin 76) was directly infused into 
the isolated arteries to the sino-atrial and atrioventricular nodes of 
anesthetized dogs, causing a dose-related inhibition of sino-atrial nodal 
automaticity and atrioventricular nodal conductivity; these effects were not 
attenuated by autonomic blockade or cervical vagotomy.
The important negative 
chronotropic and dramatropic effects of contrast media used for coronary 
angiography are direct actions and cannot be effectively blocked by 
premedication with atropine.
DOI: 10.1148/121.1.205
PMID: 959540 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of methylene blue on transmission of excitation at peripheral autonomic synapses]. 1. Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova. 1976 Sep;62(9):1300-9.

[Effect of methylene blue on transmission of excitation at peripheral autonomic 
synapses].

[Article in Russian]

Nozdrachev AD
 Gnetov AV, Kachalov IuP, Fedorova LD, Sanin GIu.
PMID: 188691 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Nitrous Oxide Effects on Isolated Myocardium 1. Anesthesiology. 1990 Nov;73(5):930-43. doi: 10.1097/00000542-199011000-00022.

Nitrous oxide effects on isolated myocardium: a reexamination in vitro.

Lawson D(1)
 Frazer MJ, Lynch C 3rd.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, 
Charlottesville 22908.
This study examined in vitro myocardial depression by 50% N2O.
Maximal isometric 
contractions of guinea pig right ventricular papillary muscles were studied in 
Tyrode's superfusate at 37 degrees C within a gas-tight chamber.
Superfusate (pH 
at 7.45) and chamber were equilibrated with 95% O2/5% CO2.
After control 
measurements in 95% O2, muscles were studied with 50% N2 and 50% N2O (45% O2/5% 
CO2) in random order with an intervening and final recovery in oxygen.
Muscles 
were field stimulated after rest and at 0.1-3 Hz.
At 37 degrees C, muscle 
performance deteriorated over time with exposure to reduced oxygen; therefore, 
identical experiments were performed at 30 degrees C in which no systematic 
deterioration occurred.
Peak tension and maximum rate of tension development 
(dT/dtmax) were compared for each stimulation rate.
At both temperatures, N2O 
caused a 10-15% depression of contractility as compared to that observed with 
nitrogen.
In a second protocol, muscles were studied at 37 degrees C in 26 mM K+ 
Tyrode's solution with 0.10 microM isoproterenol to study enhanced contractions 
mediated by slow (Ca2(+)-channel-dependent) action potentials.
Rested-state 
double stimulations were used (stimulus interval, 250-600 ms) resulting in a 
first rested-state contraction followed by a second contraction (C2) with rapid 
initial tension development.
The muscles were exposed to nitrogen and N2O as in 
the force-frequency experiments and did not deteriorate over time.
In this 
setting, N2O also caused a 10-15% depression of C2 contractility as compared 
with nitrogen.
Another set of muscles was studied in 95% O2 to which 0.5% 
halothane or 1% isoflurane was added before exposure to nitrogen and N2O.
The 
combined depressant action of N2O with either halothane or isoflurane did not 
differ from that predicted by the simple addition of independent effects; there 
was no evidence of synergism.
Furthermore, N2O (50%) alone depressed dT/dtmax in 
a manner similar to that of 0.5% halothane and different from that of 1.0% 
isoflurane.
Experiments conducted in iso-osmolar 40 mM Na+ Tyrode's solution, in 
which activator Ca2+ arose from the sarcoplasmic reticulum Ca2+, also showed 
greater depression by N2O than nitrogen.
N2O (50%) is a myocardial depressant 
independent of concurrent hypoxic effects with a pattern and magnitude of 
contractile depression similar to that of 0.5% halothane.
DOI: 10.1097/00000542-199011000-00022
PMID: 2240682 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Excitatory effects of fentanyl upon the rat electroencephalogram and auditory-evoked potential responses during anaesthesia 1. Eur J Anaesthesiol. 2003 Oct;20(10):800-8. doi: 10.1017/s0265021503001297.

Excitatory effects of fentanyl upon the rat electroencephalogram and 
auditory-evoked potential responses during anaesthesia.

Antunes LM(1)
 Roughan JV, Flecknell PA.
Author information:
(1)Comparative Biology Centre, Medical School, Newcastle-upon-Tyne, UK.
Lantunes@utad.pt

BACKGROUND AND OBJECTIVE: Previous studies have shown existence of inconsistent 
data concerning the use of auditory-evoked potential (AEP) and 
electroencephalogram (EEG) changes to measure the depth of anaesthesia in 
regimens involving the use of opioids.
The present studies characterize the 
effects of fentanyl on those responses in rats.
METHODS: The effects of a bolus of fentanyl (6-10 microg kg(-1) intravenously) 
alone or following naloxone (100 microg kg(-1) intravenously) were examined 
using brain responses in rats during light anaesthesia with either propofol 
(20-30 mg kg(-1) h(-1)) or isoflurane (0.8%).
Electrophysiological data were 
recorded using silver ball electrodes.
The rats' tracheas were intubated and a 
femoral artery cannula was inserted to monitor blood pressure.
Body temperature, 
respiratory and pulse rate, and pedal withdrawal data were also collected.
Parameters measured before and following administration of naloxone and fentanyl 
or of fentanyl alone were compared using repeated-measures ANOVA.
RESULTS: Fentanyl significantly increased the latency of the major peak from the 
AEP during propofol and isoflurane anaesthesia (F = 13.2 and 13.5, respectively; 
P < 0.05) and the amplitude differential between two waveform complexes, and the 
second differential index (F = 28.3 and 57.2, respectively; P < 0.01).
The 
spectral edge frequency and median frequency from the EEG tended to increase.
These effects were abolished by the prior administration of naloxone.
CONCLUSIONS: These excitatory effects were inconsistent with the classical 
concept of brain activity depression indicating a deepening of anaesthesia.
DOI: 10.1017/s0265021503001297
PMID: 14580049 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Localized drug delivery using crosslinked gelatin gels containing liposomes: Factors influencing liposome stability and drug release 1. J Biomed Mater Res. 2000 Jul;51(1):96-106. doi: 
10.1002/(sici)1097-4636(200007)51:1<96::aid-jbm13>3.0.co;2-s.

Localized drug delivery using crosslinked gelatin gels containing liposomes: 
factors influencing liposome stability and drug release.

DiTizio V(1)
 Karlgard C, Lilge L, Khoury AE, Mittelman MW, DiCosmo F.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biomedical Engineering, University of Toronto, Toronto, Canada.
We describe a drug-delivery vehicle that combines the sustained release 
properties of liposomes with the structural advantages of crosslinked gelatin 
gels that can be implanted directly or coated onto medical devices.
Liposome 
inclusion in gelatin gels does not compromise thermal stability nor does it 
interfere with the resiliency of gels to tensile force.
However, electron spin 
resonance analysis of sequestered DPPC liposomes revealed a slight depression 
(ca.
1.0 degrees C) of the gel-to-fluid phase transition relative to liposomes 
in suspension.
The level of liposome release from gels was determined by 
liposome concentration, liposome size, and the presence of poly(ethylene oxide) 
chains in the gel matrix or in the liposome membrane.
Both neutral and charged 
liposomes displayed relatively high affinities for poly(ethylene glycol)gelatin 
gels, with only 10-15% release of initially sequestered liposomes while 
liposomes in which poly(ethylene glycol) was included within the membrane were 
not as well retained (approximately 65% release).
The in vitro efflux of 
ciprofloxacin from liposomal gels immersed in serum was nearly complete after 24 
h compared to 38% release of liposomal chlorhexidine after 6 days.
The 
serum-induced destabilization of liposomal ciprofloxacin depended on the 
accessibility of serum components to gels as partly immersed gels retained 
approximately 50% of their load of drug after 24 h. In vivo experiments using a 
catheterized rabbit model of urinary tract infection revealed the absence of 
viable Escherichia coli on coated catheter surfaces in seven out of nine cases 
while all untreated catheter surfaces examined (n = 7) were contaminated.
Copyright 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/(sici)1097-4636(200007)51:1<96::aid-jbm13>3.0.co;2-s
PMID: 10813750 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of sevoflurane on contraction and membrane potentials in canine right ventricular myocytes]. 1. Masui. 1993 Nov;42(11):1653-8.

[Effect of sevoflurane on contraction and membrane potentials in canine right 
ventricular myocytes].

[Article in Japanese]

Hatakeyama N(1)
 Kubo H, Shibuya N, Yamazaki M, Ito Y, Momose Y.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology University, School of Medicine, Toyama.
The effects of sevoflurane on contraction and membrane potentials were studied 
in isolated canine ventricular muscle strips.
Sevoflurane depressed 
electrically-induced contraction in a dose-dependent manner.
The inhibitory 
effect was more pronounced in high-K+ Tyrode solution than in normal Tyrode 
solution suggesting that sevoflurane inhibits transmembrane Ca2+ influx.
In 
electrophysiological studies, sevoflurane depressed both overshoot and the 
plateau phase of action potentials.
Resting membrane potential was not affected 
by sevoflurane.
We conclude that the depression of myocardial contractility by 
sevoflurane may be due to block of transmembrane calcium influx.
PMID: 8254876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Biaryls as potent
 tunable dual neurokinin 1 receptor antagonists and serotonin transporter inhibitors 1.
Bioorg Med Chem Lett.
2015 Aug 1;25(15):3039-43. doi: 
10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.04.098.
Epub 2015 Jun 2.
Biaryls as potent, tunable dual neurokinin 1 receptor antagonists and serotonin 
transporter inhibitors.
Degnan AP(1), Tora GO(2), Han Y(2), Rajamani R(2), Bertekap R(2), Krause R(2), 
Davis CD(2), Hu J(2), Morgan D(2), Taylor SJ(2), Krause K(2), Li YW(2), Mattson 
G(2), Cunningham MA(2), Taber MT(2), Lodge NJ(2), Bronson JJ(2), Gillman KW(2), 
Macor JE(2).
Author information:
(1)Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Research and Development, 5 Research Parkway, 
Wallingford, CT 06492, United States.
Electronic address: andrew.degnan@bms.com.
(2)Bristol-Myers Squibb Co., Research and Development, 5 Research Parkway, 
Wallingford, CT 06492, United States.
Depression is a serious illness that affects millions of patients.
Current 
treatments are associated with a number of undesirable side effects.
Neurokinin 
1 receptor (NK1R) antagonists have recently been shown to potentiate the 
antidepressant effects of serotonin-selective reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) in a 
number of animal models.
Herein we describe the optimization of a biaryl 
chemotype to provide a series of potent dual NK1R antagonists/serotonin 
transporter (SERT) inhibitors.
Through the choice of appropriate substituents, 
the SERT/NK1R ratio could be tuned to afford a range of target selectivity 
profiles.
This effort culminated in the identification of an analog that 
demonstrated oral bioavailability, favorable brain uptake, and efficacy in the 
gerbil foot tap model.
Ex vivo occupancy studies with compound 58 demonstrated 
the ability to maintain NK1 receptor saturation (>88% occupancy) while titrating 
the desired level of SERT occupancy (11-84%) via dose selection.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bmcl.2015.04.098
PMID: 26048800 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Assessment of the opiate properties of two constituents of a toxic illicit drug mixture 1. Drug Alcohol Depend. 1984 Jul;13(4):367-74. doi: 10.1016/0376-8716(84)90004-8.

Assessment of the opiate properties of two constituents of a toxic illicit drug 
mixture.

Johannessen JN
 Markey SP.
The intravenous use of an illicit synthetic drug preparation has caused 
permanent parkinsonism in a number of addicts.
Chemical analysis has revealed 
the ingredients to be two related compounds 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP) and 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-4-propionoxypiperidine (MPPP).
The opiate properties of these 
two compounds have been assessed using in vitro receptor binding techniques as 
well as behavioral tests indicative of opiate action, including analgesia, 
catatonia, respiratory depression and the loss of righting and corneal reflexes.
All opiate activity was found to reside with MPPP, which proved to be a potent 
mu-type agonist.
It is concluded that the opiate properties of MPPP alone 
explain repeated abuse of MPTP/MPPP mixtures by heroin addicts.
DOI: 10.1016/0376-8716(84)90004-8
PMID: 6148225 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant-like effect of etazolate
 a cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase 4 inhibitor—an approach using rodent behavioral antidepressant tests battery 1.
Eur J Pharmacol.
2012 Aug 15;689(1-3):125-31. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.05.051.
Epub 2012 Jun 12.
Antidepressant-like effect of etazolate, a cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase 4 
inhibitor--an approach using rodent behavioral antidepressant tests battery.
Jindal A(1), Mahesh R, Gautam B, Bhatt S, Pandey D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacy, Birla Institute of Technology & Science, 
Pilani-333031, Rajasthan, India.
kumarjindal26@gmail.com

Etazolate, a pyrazolopyridine class derivative is selective inhibitor of type 4 
phosphodiesterase (PDE4), an enzyme catalyzes the hydrolysis of cyclic 
nucleotide viz.
cAMP & regulates cAMP signal transduction.
Enhancing cAMP signal 
transduction by inhibition of PDE4 is known to be beneficial in depression 
disorders.
Thus, the present study was designed to investigate thoroughly the 
antidepressant potential of etazolate using rodent behavioral models of 
depression.
Acute treatment of etazolate (0.25-1 mg/kg, i.p.)
exhibited 
antidepressant-like effects in forced swim test (FST) & tail suspension test 
(TST) in mice without influencing the baseline locomotion in actophotometer 
test.
Interaction studies of etazolate sub-effective dose (0.12 mg/kg, i.p.
), 
were carried out with sub-effective dose of conventional antidepressants like 
fluoxetine (5mg/kg, i.p.
), venlafaxine (4 mg/kg, i.p.)
& desipramine (5 mg/kg, 
i.p.)
in FST.
Etazolate at sub-effective dose produced synergistic 
antidepressant-like effect with conventional antidepressants in the mouse FST.
In addition, combined treatment of etazolate & conventional antidepressants had 
no significant effect on baseline locomotion.
Moreover, etazolate (0.5 and 1 
mg/kg, i.p.)
increased head twitch scores in mice & antagonized the 
reserpine-induced hypothermia in rats.
Chronic treatment (14 days) with 
etazolate (0.5 and 1 mg/kg, p.o.)
& fluoxetine (10 mg/kg, p.o.)
significantly 
reversed the behavioral anomalies induced by bilateral olfactory bulbectomy in 
rats in modified open field exploration.
In conclusion, taken together, our 
results suggested that etazolate exhibited antidepressant-like activity in acute 
& chronic rodent models of depression & deserves as a therapeutic tool that 
could help the conventional pharmacotherapy of depression.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2012.05.051
PMID: 22698578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The central chemosensitivity is not altered by cerebral erythropoietin 1. Neurosci Lett. 2015 Nov 16;609:63-8. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.10.026. Epub 
2015 Oct 17.

The central chemosensitivity is not altered by cerebral erythropoietin.

Ballot O(1)
 Laouafa S(1), Elliot-Portal E(2), Tam R(1), Voituron N(3), Joseph 
V(1), Soliz J(4).
Author information:
(1)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, Pavillon St François d'Assise, 
Département de Pédiatrie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, QC, Canada.
(2)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, Pavillon St François d'Assise, 
Département de Pédiatrie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, QC, Canada; 
Molecular biology and Biotechnology Institute, Universidad Mayor de San Andres, 
La Paz, Bolivia.
(3)Université Paris 13, Sorbonne Paris Cité, UFR SMBH, Laboratoire "Hypoxie et 
poumons", EA 2363, 93017, Bobigny, France.
(4)Centre de Recherche du CHU de Québec, Pavillon St François d'Assise, 
Département de Pédiatrie, Faculté de Médecine, Université Laval, QC, Canada.
Electronic address: jorge.soliz@crchuq.ulaval.ca.
The stimulation of central chemoreceptors by CO2 is considered essential for 
breathing.
The supporting evidence include the fact that central apnea in 
neonates correlates with immaturity of the CO2-sensing mechanism, and that 
congenital central hypoventilation syndrome (CCHS) is characterized by the 
absence of a ventilatory response to elevated PCO2.
We reported previously that 
cerebral erythropoietin (Epo) is a potent respiratory stimulant upon normoxia 
and hypoxia.
The injection of soluble Epo receptor (sEpoR; the natural EpoR 
competitor to bind Epo) via the cisterna magna (ICI: intra-cisternal injection) 
decreases basal ventilation in adult and newborn mice.
Moreover, sEpoR induces 
respiratory depression in adult and newborn mice exposed to hypoxia.
In this 
study we tested the hypothesis that endogenous brain Epo also modulates the 
respiratory stimulation induced by the activation of central CO2 chemoreceptors.
Adult and newborn male and female mice received an injection of sEpoR or vehicle 
via the cisterna magna.
Twenty-four hours later basal minute ventilation and the 
ventilatory response to hypercapnia (5% CO2) were evaluated by plethysmography.
Our results did not show a difference in the hypercapnic response between sEpoR 
and vehicle-injected male or female mice at postnatal or adult ages.
We 
concluded that endogenous brain Epo does not contribute to modulating the 
PCO2-mediated central activation of breathing.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2015.10.026
PMID: 26472708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria isolated from stressed rat heart. 1. Recent Adv Stud Cardiac Struct Metab. 1975;8:293-300.

Oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria isolated from stressed rat heart.

Nagano M
 Mochizuki S, Kogure T, Kosuga T, Saito N.

Oxidative phosphorylation was measured polarographically in mitochondria 
isolated from rat heart.
With regard to ADP/O ratio and respiratory control 
index, no differences were found among mitochondria isolated from normal, 
acutely (increased pneumatic resistance of the heart-lung preparation) and 
chronicly (renal hypertension) stressed heart.
However, the acute stressed heart 
induced by strangulating the outflow tract of the heart-lung preparation showed 
clear depression and tendency to depression, respectively, in the level of ADP/O 
ratio and respiratory control index in mitochondria.
The results indicate that 
there is no change in the oxidative phosphorylating mechanism of the myocardial 
mitochondria of nonfailed heart despite acute or chronic pressure loadings; 
however, there is an uncoupling of oxidative phosphorylation in mitochondria of 
the failed heart after acute strangulation of the outflow tract.
PMID: 1215639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of cord factor on microsomal enzymes. 1. Am Rev Respir Dis. 1974 Nov;110(5):641-6. doi: 10.1164/arrd.1974.110.5.641.

Effects of cord factor on microsomal enzymes.

Toida I.

DOI: 10.1164/arrd.1974.110.5.641
PMID: 4372916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The mechanism of disulphide reduction by mitochondria <jats:p>1. Cystamine was reduced to the corresponding thiol by rat liver mitochondria
 even in the presence of rotenone or antimycin A.
2.
The reduction of disulphides was stimulated by the accumulation of NADH or by the addition of NADH to osmotically ‘shocked’ mitochondria.
3.
Energy made available by oxidative phosphorylation was not essential for the reduction of disulphides.
4.
Cystamine was not reduced during the oxidation of NADH by ultrasonically treated particles, which had lost their capacity for oxidation of α-oxo acids.
5.
In intact mitochondria, arsenite and other inhibitors of vicinal dithiols caused a decrease in the capacity for reduction of disulphides concomitantly with an inhibition of the oxidation of α-oxo acids.
6.
Isolated lipoamide dehydrogenase reduced cystamine at the expense of NADH, provided that lipoic acid was also present.
7.
It is concluded that in mitochondria the reduction of cystamine and related disulphides is probably brought about by interaction with reduced lipoic acid, generated by the α-oxo acid dehydrogenase complexes during the oxidation of α-oxo acids or by reaction of lipoamide dehydrogenase with NADH.</jats:p>
Pancreatic Origin of Normal Serum Amylase 1. Gastroenterology. 1971 May;60(5):988-9.

Pancreatic origin of normal serum amylase.

Berk JE
 Nothman MM, Callow AD.
PMID: 5581339 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The histopathological and electron-microscopic examination of the stereotactic pulsed radiofrequency and conventional radiofrequency thermocoagulation lesions in rat brain 1. Neurol Res. 2006 Dec;28(8):841-4. doi: 10.1179/016164106X110409.

The histopathological and electron-microscopic examination of the stereotactic 
pulsed radiofrequency and conventional radiofrequency thermocoagulation lesions 
in rat brain.

Tun K(1)
 Savas A, Sargon MF, Solaroglu I, Kanpolat Y.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosurgery, Medical Faculty, Ankara University, Ankara, 
Turkey.
kagantun@yahoo.com

OBJECTIVE: Neurodestructive procedures have been used for treating intractable 
pain for a long time.
Pulsed radiofrequency (RF) is a newly defined energy type.
Pulsed RF may be used in the treatment of patients with some pain syndromes in 
whom the pain could not be controlled by the alternative techniques.
The 
objective of the present study was to examine the histological and electron 
microscopical changes in rat brain after pulsed RF application.
METHODS: Forty-five male rats were used in these experiments.
Lesions were 
applied stereotactically to the target areas of the rat brains.
Two different RF 
energy type were used as representative models of pulsed-RF and conventional-RF 
procedures.
The rats were kept alive for 21 days and then killed.
The effect of 
pulsed RF lesions on cerebral tissue ultrastructure was studied.
RESULTS: In the pulsed RF group, intracytoplasmic edema, clarity of the 
mitochondrial cristas and opening in the cell membrane pores were observed on 
the electron microscopic examination.
In the conventional RF group, these 
findings were more prominent.
In the pulsed RF group, the ratio of the effected 
neurons was 5.5% on light microscopic examination.
In the conventional RF group, 
the ratio of the effected neurons was 14.26% and central necrosis was observed 
additionally.
DISCUSSION: Pulsed RF caused ultrastructural changes in the neurons.
The pulsed 
RF may possibly cause a depression on the cell membrane potential by opening the 
cell membrane pores and resulting in the ion entrance into the cell cytoplasm 
and intracytoplasmic edema.
However, it seems that all these changes were 
reversible.
DOI: 10.1179/016164106X110409
PMID: 17288742 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Feline parvovirus propagates in cat bone marrow cultures and inhibits hematopoietic colony formation in vitro <jats:p>Feline parvovirus (FPV) causes leukopenia in naturally infected cats. We investigated the mechanism of hematopoietic depression by this virus in feline bone marrow cultured in vitro. In suspension cultures we demonstrated FPV propagation and replication using DNA molecular hybridization. Viral RNA and DNA were observed by in situ hybridization in about 10% of marrow cells at day 3. Granulocytes and their precursors were virtually absent from infected cultures after six days. Infected cells showed viral capsid protein predominantly in nuclei by immunofluorescence. In clonal assays
 FPV most efficiently inhibited hematopoietic colony formation by myeloid progenitor cells (CFU-GM), but erythroid colony formation (BFU-E and CFU-E-derived) was also depressed in the presence of virus.
Inhibition of colony formation could be abrogated by physical inactivation of the virus or preincubation with specific neutralizing antibodies.
Recombinant human colony stimulating factors GM-CSF and G-CSF supported feline myelopoiesis in progenitor assays, and FPV completely inhibited factor dependent colony formation.</jats:p>
SELECTIVE TARGETING OF KUPFFER CELLS WITH LIPOSOMAL BUTYRATE AUGMENTS PORTAL VENOUS TRANSFUSION-INDUCED IMMUNOSUPPRESSION1
2 1.
Transplantation.
1998 May 27;65(10):1294-8. doi: 
10.1097/00007890-199805270-00002.
Selective targeting of Kupffer cells with liposomal butyrate augments portal 
venous transfusion-induced immunosuppression.
Perez RV(1), Johnson J, Hubbard NE, Erickson K, Morgan M, Kim S, Rudich SM, 
Katznelson S, German JB.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of California, Davis School of Medicine, 
USA.
BACKGROUND: Enhanced Kupffer cell production of the immunosuppressive 
arachidonic acid metabolite prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) has been shown to be a 
mechanism of the immunosuppressive effect of portal venous transfusions (PVT).
Butyrate, a four-carbon short-chain fatty acid, has received increased attention 
because of its ability to enhance gene transcription.
This study tested the 
hypothesis that the intrahepatic delivery of butyrate enhances Kupffer cell PGE2 
production and thus augments the immunosuppressive effect of PVT.
METHODS: Butyrate was incorporated into liposomes and administered intravenously 
to Lewis rats.
Control rats were administered liposomes without butyrate.
Twenty-four hours after liposome injection, rats were administered a PVT of 1 ml 
of Wistar-Furth blood.
Kupffer cells were isolated, and PGE2 and tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha levels were measured in the culture medium after 24 hr.
Additionally, Kupffer cells from butyrate-treated and control animals were added 
to one-way mixed lymphocyte reaction cultures.
RESULTS: Intrahepatic delivery of butyrate via liposomes increased Kupffer cell 
PGE2 (3800+/-1220 vs. 1010+/-119 pg/ml, P<0.05) and decreased tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (1670+/-81 vs. 3360+/-415 pg/ml, P<0.01) production as compared 
with controls.
Butyrate also augmented the Kupffer cell-mediated 
immunosuppression as demonstrated by significant depression of the mixed 
lymphocyte reaction (690+/-119 vs. 3850+/-148 cpm, P<0.01).
CONCLUSION: The results support the hypothesis that intrahepatic delivery of 
butyrate enhances Kupffer cell PGE2 production, and specific targeting of 
Kupffer cells with liposomes containing immunomodulating agents such as butyrate 
may be a useful means of augmenting immunosuppression protocols in organ 
transplantation.
DOI: 10.1097/00007890-199805270-00002
PMID: 9625008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A spontaneous depressive pattern in adult female rhesus macaques <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Non-human primates offer unique opportunities to study the development of depression rooted in behavioral and physiological abnormalities. This study observed adult female rhesus macaques within social hierarchies and aimed to characterize the physiological and brain abnormalities accompanying depressive-like behavior. The behaviors of 31 female rhesus macaques from 14 different breeding groups were video recorded and the footage was analyzed using the focal animal technique. There were 13 monkeys who never displayed huddling behavior (non-huddlers). The remaining 18 monkeys were divided into two groups according the mean time spent in the huddle posture. Four monkeys were designated as high huddlers
 whereas the other 14 monkeys were low huddlers.
An inverse relationship was discovered between social rank and depression.
High huddlers spent more time engaging in physical contact and in close proximity to other monkeys, as well as less time spontaneously and reactively locomoting, than low huddlers and/or non-huddlers.
Cortisol levels measured from the hair were elevated significantly in high huddlers compared with low huddlers and non-huddlers and the measured cortisol levels were specifically higher in high huddlers than subordinate or dominant control monkeys.
Regional cerebral blood flow data revealed significant and widespread decreases in high huddlers compared with non-huddlers.</jats:p>
Human platelet monoamine oxidase—A useful enzyme in the study of psychiatric disorders? 1. Neuroscience. 1982 Jul;7(7):1577-94. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(82)90016-1.

Human platelet monoamine oxidase--a useful enzyme in the study of psychiatric 
disorders?

Fowler CJ
 Tipton KF, MacKay AV, Youdim MB.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(82)90016-1
PMID: 6956813 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Chronic Mild Stress in Female Bax Inhibitor-1-Gene Knockout Mice 1. Clin Psychopharmacol Neurosci. 2012 Dec;10(3):155-62. doi: 
10.9758/cpn.2012.10.3.155. Epub 2012 Dec 20.

Effects of chronic mild stress in female bax inhibitor-1-gene knockout mice.

Sui ZY(1)
 Chae HJ, Huang GB, Zhao T, Shrestha Muna S, Chung YC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Chonbuk National University Medical School & 
Institute for Medical Sciences, Jeonju, Korea.
; Department of Psychiatry, 
Chonbuk National University Hospital & Research Institute of Clinical Medicine, 
Jeonju, Korea.
OBJECTIVE: The anti-apoptotic protein Bax inhibitor-1 (BI-1) is a regulator of 
apoptosis linked to endoplasmic reticulum (ER) stress, and BI-1(-/-) mice 
exhibit increased sensitivity to tissue damage.
The purpose of this study was to 
investigate the role of BI-1 in the pathogenesis of chronic mild stress 
(CMS)-induced depression-like behaviors in BI-1(-/-) mice.
METHODS: We delivered CMS for 2 or 6 weeks in BI-1-knockout and wild-type mice.
Control groups of BI-1-knockout and wild-type mice were left undisturbed.
The 
measured parameters were sucrose consumption at weeks 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6, 
spontaneous locomotion, and a forced swimming test (FST) at weeks 2 and 6.
RESULTS: Significant decreases in sucrose consumption and increases in 
immobility time in the FST were observed in both stress groups compared with the 
non-stress groups.
Interestingly, at week 2, but not at week 6, BI-1(-/-)-stress 
mice showed less sucrose intake and greater immobility time than did 
BI-1(+/+)-stress mice.
CONCLUSION: These results suggest that BI-1 may play role in protecting against 
the depressogenic effects of CMS in the short term, but not in the long term.
Further study is required to deepen understanding of the role of BI-1 in 
protecting against depression.
DOI: 10.9758/cpn.2012.10.3.155
PMCID: PMC3569165
PMID: 23430888
Inhibition of microsomal lipid peroxidation by glutathione and glutathione transferases B and AA. Role of endogenous phospholipase A2 <jats:p>Lipid peroxidation in vitro in rat liver microsomes (microsomal fractions) initiated by ADP-Fe3+ and NADPH was inhibited by the rat liver soluble supernatant fraction. When this fraction was subjected to frontal-elution chromatography
 most, if not all, of its inhibitory activity could be accounted for by the combined effects of two fractions, one containing Se-dependent glutathione (GSH) peroxidase activity and the other the GSH transferases.
In the latter fraction, GSH transferases B and AA, but not GSH transferases A and C, possessed inhibitory activity.
GSH transferase B replaced the soluble supernatant fraction as an effective inhibitor of lipid peroxidation in vitro.
If the microsomes were pretreated with the phospholipase A2 inhibitor p-bromophenacyl bromide, neither the soluble supernatant fraction nor GSH transferase B inhibited lipid peroxidation in vitro.
Similarly, if all microsomal enzymes were heat-inactivated and lipid peroxidation was initiated with FeCl3/sodium ascorbate neither the soluble supernatant fraction nor GSH transferase B caused inhibition, but in both cases inhibition could be restored by the addition of porcine pancreatic phospholipase A2 to the incubation.
It is concluded that the inhibition of microsomal lipid peroxidation in vitro requires the consecutive action of phospholipase A2, which releases fatty acyl hydroperoxides from peroxidized phospholipids, and GSH peroxidases, which reduce them.
The GSH peroxidases involved are the Se-dependent GSH peroxidase and the Se-independent GSH peroxidases GSH transferases B and AA.</jats:p>
Proceedings: Central uptake and cardiovascular effects of delta-aminolaevulinic acid. 1. Br J Pharmacol. 1973 Sep;49(1):178P.

Proceedings: Central uptake and cardiovascular effects of delta-aminolaevulinic 
acid.

Goldberg A
 McGillion FB.
PMCID: PMC1776421
PMID: 4787551 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Spinal cord activation differentially modulates ischaemic electrical responses to different stressors in canine ventricles 1. Auton Neurosci. 2004 Mar 31;111(1):37-47. doi: 10.1016/j.autneu.2004.02.005.

Spinal cord activation differentially modulates ischaemic electrical responses 
to different stressors in canine ventricles.

Cardinal R(1)
 Ardell JL, Linderoth B, Vermeulen M, Foreman RD, Armour JA.
Author information:
(1)Centre de recherche, Hôpital du Sacré-Coeur de Montréal, Québec, Canada.
cardinal@crhsc.umontreal.ca

Spinal cord stimulation (SCS) represents an acceptable treatment modality for 
patients with chronic angina pectoris refractory to standard therapy, but its 
mechanism of action remains unclear.
To develop an experimental paradigm to 
study this issue, ameroid (AM) constrictors were implanted around the left 
circumflex coronary artery (LCx) in canines.
Six weeks later, unipolar 
electrograms were recorded from 191 sites in the LCx territory in the 
open-chest, anesthetized state under basal pacing at 150 beats/min.
We 
investigated the effect of SCS on ST segment displacements induced in the 
collateral-dependent myocardium in response to two stressors: (i) transient 
bouts of rapid ventricular pacing (TRP: 240/min for 1 min) and (ii) angiotensin 
II administered to right atrial neurons via their coronary artery blood supply.
ST segment responses to TRP consisted of ST segment elevation in central areas 
of the LCx territory and ST depression at more peripheral areas.
Such responses 
were unchanged when TRP was applied under SCS.
Shortening of repolarization 
intervals in the metabolically compromised myocardium in response to TRP was 
also unaffected by SCS.
In contrast, ST segment responses to intracoronary 
angiotensin II, which consisted of increased ST elevation, were attenuated by 
SCS in 6/8 preparations.
The modulator effects of SCS were greatest at sites at 
which the greatest responses to angiotensin II occurred in the absence of SCS.
These data indicate that spinal cord stimulation may attenuate the deleterious 
effects that stressors exert on the myocardium with reduced coronary reserve, 
particularly stressors associated with chemical activation of the intrinsic 
cardiac nervous system.
Copyright 2004 Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.autneu.2004.02.005
PMID: 15109937 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Importance of Retinal Photoreceptors to the Photoperiodic Control of Seasonal Breeding in the Ewe
2 1. Biol Reprod. 1983 Sep;29(2):316-25. doi: 10.1095/biolreprod29.2.316.

Importance of retinal photoreceptors to the photoperiodic control of seasonal 
breeding in the ewe.

Legan SJ
 Karsch FJ.
Two experiments were performed to determine whether the eyes are necessary for 
photoperiodic control of reproduction in ewes.
In the first, intact and 
estradiol-treated ovariectomized (OVX + E) ewes were housed in each of 2 
photoperiod-controlled rooms with a vasectomized ram and subjected to 90-day 
alternations between long and short days.
Prior to blinding, long days initiated 
anestrus in intact ewes and a suppression of serum luteinizing hormone (LH) 
levels in OVX + E ewes; short days caused onset of estrous cycles and an 
increase in LH levels in the intact and OVX + E ewes, respectively.
After 1.5 
years of such photoperiodic control, all ewes were blinded by bilateral orbital 
enucleation.
Photoperiodic control was lost following blinding, but circannual 
alternations between cyclicity and anestrus or high and low LH levels, were 
maintained in most ewes for the remaining 2.5 years of the study.
In one group 
of OVX + E ewes, serum LH levels remained synchronized to the 90-day shifts in 
photoperiod for about 1 year after blinding.
Once the sighted ram was removed 
from the room, however, the 90-day rhythm in LH disappeared and a circannual 
pattern of LH became evident, suggesting that blind ewes may receive 
photoperiodic information from a sighted ram.
This possibility was supported by 
the results of the second experiment in which 12 additional OVX + E ewes were 
blinded and exposed to 90 long days and 90 short days in the absence of a 
sighted ram.
In these ewes, serum LH levels were not controlled by the changes 
in photoperiod.
These results are consistent with the following conclusions: 1) 
the eyes are necessary for perception of photoperiod in the ewe and 2) ewes have 
an endogenous circannual rhythm of reproduction and/or they can be controlled by 
other environmental signals in the absence of photoperiodic input.
Further, the 
results lead to the hypothesis that blind ewes can receive photoperiodic 
information indirectly from a sighted ram.
DOI: 10.1095/biolreprod29.2.316
PMID: 6685536 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis by 1-alkylimidazoles 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1975 Oct 15;24(20):1902-3. doi:
10.1016/0006-2952(75)90414-1.

Inhibition of cholesterol biosynthesis by 1-alkylimidazoles.

Baggaley KH
 Atkin SD, English PD, Hindley RM, Morgan B, Green J.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(75)90414-1
PMID: 1191407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of antihypertensive therapy on calcium transport by cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum of SHRs 1. Cardiovasc Res. 1980 Dec;14(12):692-9. doi: 10.1093/cvr/14.12.692.

Effect of antihypertensive therapy on calcium transport by cardiac sarcoplasmic 
reticulum of SHRs.

Limas CJ
 Spier SS.
Cardiac hypertrophy develops during the course of blood pressure elevation in 
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRs) and is associated with defective calcium 
transport by cardiac sarcoplasmic reticulum (SR).
AT 20 weeks of age, calcium 
uptake is reduced in SHRs (42 +/- 1.3 vs 64 +/- 1.6 nmol X mg-1 X min-1 in 
age-matched normotensive Wistar-Kyoto rats, P less than 0.01), while Ca2+ ATPase 
activity is enhanced (44 +/- 1.1 vs 35 +/- 0.7 nmol X mg-1 X min-1 in WKYs, P = 
0.02); this results in low stoichiometry between calcium uptake and ATP 
hydrolysis in SHRs.
The steady-state levels of the phosphoprotein intermediate 
[EP] of the transport ATPase are higher in normotensive rats (0.97 +/- 0.1 vs 
0.67 +/- 0.08 nmol X mg-1 in SHRs, P less than 0.01) but the Ca2+- and 
ATP-dependency are similar in the two groups.
In order to study the relative 
roles of hypertension and cardiac hypertrophy in the depression of SHR function, 
20-week old SHRs and normotensive rats were treated for 10 weeks with either 
hydralazine (100 mg X litre-1) or alpha-methyldopa (8 g X litre-1).
Both 
therapeutic regimens resulted in near normalisation of blood pressure of SHRs 
(hydralazine: 18.1 +/- 0.5 kPa [136 +/- 4 mmHg]; alpha-methyldopa 17.6 +/- kPa 
[132 +/- 3 mmHg]).
Regression of cardiac hypertrophy, however, was seen only in 
the alpha-methyldopa-treated group, as judged by changes in left ventricular 
weight, RNA/DNA ratio, and hydroxyproline content.
Furthermore, improvement in 
calcium transport capacity by the SHR, as reflected in higher calcium uptake and 
stoichiometric ratio between uptake and ATP hydrolysis, was found after 
alpha-methyldopa, but not hydralazine treatment.
These results indicate that 
reversal of cardiac hypertrophy is required for improvement in calcium transport 
by cardiac SR after antihypertensive therapy of SHRs.
DOI: 10.1093/cvr/14.12.692
PMID: 6455196 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Electroencephalographic and behavioral assessment of intracerebroventricular somatostatin and a substance P analogue 1. Brain Res. 1989 Jun 12;489(2):223-30. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(89)90854-8.

Electroencephalographic and behavioral assessment of intracerebroventricular 
somatostatin and a substance P analogue.

Grabow TS(1)
 Gaumann DM, Yaksh TL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Medicine, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905.
Chronically implanted rats were injected either with somatostatin (SST) lumbar 
intrathecally (i.t.)
(100 micrograms, n = 5), into the fourth ventricle (3 
micrograms, n = 5; 10 micrograms, n = 6; 30 micrograms, n = 5) or into the 
lateral ventricle (10 micrograms, n = 6; 30 micrograms, n = 6), or received an 
injection of the substance P (SP) analogue, [D-Pro2, D-Trp7,9]SP into the fourth 
ventricle (0.3 micrograms, n = 2; 1 micrograms, n = 4; 3 micrograms, n = 4; 10 
micrograms, n = 1) or lateral ventricle (3 micrograms, n = 3).
A dose-dependent 
EEG depressant effect was observed following fourth and lateral ventricular 
injections of SST and of the SP analogue.
Acute death due to respiratory 
depression was observed following i.t.
and fourth ventricular injection of SST, 
and fourth ventricular injection of the SP analogue.
Prominent motor behavior 
(barrel rotation, circling, cranial stereotypies) was observed, without signs of 
EEG seizure activity, following intraventricular injection of both drugs.
Present findings indicate neurotoxic effects of SST and SP analogue at the 
cerebral level.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(89)90854-8
PMID: 2472857 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Characterization of the acute tolerance and dependence to morphine-induced respiratory depression in decerebrate cats. 1. Rev Esp Fisiol. 1972 Sep;28(3):167-73.

Characterization of the acute tolerance and dependence to morphine-induced 
respiratory depression in decerebrate cats.

Flórez J
 Armijo JA, Delgado G.

PMID: 4679517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
BE360
 a new selective estrogen receptor modulator, produces antidepressant and antidementia effects through the enhancement of hippocampal cell proliferation in olfactory bulbectomized mice 1.
Behav Brain Res.
2016 Jan 15;297:315-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.10.033.
Epub 
2015 Oct 20.
BE360, a new selective estrogen receptor modulator, produces antidepressant and 
antidementia effects through the enhancement of hippocampal cell proliferation 
in olfactory bulbectomized mice.
Nakagawasai O(1), Nemoto W(2), Onogi H(3), Moriya T(4), Lin JR(2), Odaira T(2), 
Yaoita F(2), Ogawa T(5), Ohta K(5), Endo Y(5), Tan-No K(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Tohoku Pharmaceutical University, 4-4-1 
Komatsushima, Aoba-ku, Sendai 981-8558, Japan.
Electronic address: 
osamun@tohoku-pharm.ac.jp.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Tohoku Pharmaceutical University, 4-4-1 
Komatsushima, Aoba-ku, Sendai 981-8558, Japan.
(3)Faculty of Health Science, Tohoku Fukushi University, 1-8-1 Kunimi, Aoba-ku, 
Sendai 981-8522, Japan.
(4)Department of Cellular Signaling, Graduate School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
Tohoku University, Aoba 6-3, Aramaki, Aoba-ku, Sendai 980-8578, Japan.
(5)Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Tohoku Pharmaceutical University, 4-4-1 
Komatushima, Aoba-ku, Sendai 981-8558, Japan.
We have reported that the carborane compound BE360 is a novel selective estrogen 
receptor modulator and new therapy option for osteoporosis.
The aim of this 
study was to explore the effects and underlying mechanisms of BE360 on 
depressive-like behavior and memory impairment in the olfactory bulbectomized 
(OBX) mice, an experimental animal model of depression and dementia.
BE360 was 
administered subcutaneously to mice using a mini-osmotic pump for 2 weeks.
Depressive-like behavior was measured as the reduced intake of a sweet solution 
in the sucrose preference test.
Short-term memory was assessed using the Y-maze 
test.
Cell proliferation was assessed by the analysis of cells expressing 
5-bromo-2'-deoxyuridine (BrdU) uptake.
The expression of phosphorylated 
cyclic-AMP response element binding protein (pCREB) and brain-derived 
neurotrophic factor (BDNF) were measured by immunoblot.
The depressive-like 
behavior and memory impairment in OBX mice were improved by the chronic 
treatment with BE360.
Immunohistochemical analysis showed that the number of 
BrdU-positive cells in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus significantly 
decreased in OBX mice whereas they increased after the chronic treatment with 
BE360.
Immunoblotting studies revealed that pCREB and BDNF were significantly 
increased in the hippocampus of OBX mice treated with BE360.
The present study 
has shown that BE360 has antidepressant and antidementia effects characterized 
by hippocampal cell proliferation potentially activated via CREB/BDNF signaling 
pathways.
These results indicate that BE360 may have valuable therapeutic 
potential against depression and neurodegenerative diseases.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.10.033
PMID: 26497104 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant-like effects of liquiritin and isoliquiritin from Glycyrrhiza uralensis in the forced swimming test and tail suspension test in mice 1. Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Jul 1;32(5):1179-84. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2007.12.021. Epub 2008 Jan 18.

Antidepressant-like effects of liquiritin and isoliquiritin from Glycyrrhiza 
uralensis in the forced swimming test and tail suspension test in mice.

Wang W(1)
 Hu X, Zhao Z, Liu P, Hu Y, Zhou J, Zhou D, Wang Z, Guo D, Guo H.

Author information:
(1)School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Peking University, Beijing, China.
Two classic animal behavior despair tests--the Forced Swimming Test (FST) and 
the Tail Suspension Test (TST) were used to evaluate the antidepressant activity 
of liquiritin and isoliquiritin from Glycyrrhiza uralensis in mice.
It was 
observed that both liquiritin and isoliquiritin at doses of 10, 20 and 40 mg/kg 
significantly reduced the immobility time in the FST and TST in mice 30 min 
after treatment.
Measurement of locomotor activity indicated that liquiritin and 
isoliquiritin had no central nervous system (CNS)-stimulating effects.
The main 
monoamine neurotransmitters and their metabolites in mouse brain regions were 
also simultaneously determined by HPLC-ECD.
It was found that these two 
compounds significantly increased the concentrations of the main 
neurotransmitters 5-HT and NE in the hippocampus, hypothalamus and cortex.
Liquiritin and isoliquiritin also significantly reduced the ratio of 5-HIAA/5-HT 
in the hippocampus, hypothalamus and cortex, slowing down 5-HT metabolism 
compared with mice treated with vehicle+stress.
In conclusion, liquiritin and 
isoliquiritin produced significant antidepressant-like effects, and their 
mechanism of action may be due to increased 5-HT and NE in the mouse 
hippocampus, hypothalamus and cortex.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2007.12.021
PMID: 18289754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Physiological activity of kappa-casein glycomacropeptide]. 1. Vopr Med Khim. 1979 May-Jun;25(3):348-52.

[Physiological activity of kappa-casein glycomacropeptide].

[Article in Russian]

Stan EIa
 Chernikov MP.
Low molecular peptide fragment [molecular weight 700-2,000] was isolated from 
the preparation of k-caseine glycomacropeptide using gel chromotography on 
Sephadex G-25 superfine.
After intravenous administration the peptide inhibited 
gastric secretion more distinctly as compared with the initial preparation.
The 
data obtained suggest that the inhibitory effect of glycomacropeptide was caused 
by fragment but not by the whole molecule.
PMID: 452502 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[An experimental study on the pathophysiology of septic ventilatory depression]. 1. Zhonghua Yi Xue Za Zhi. 1991 May;71(5):249-52
 18.
[An experimental study on the pathophysiology of septic ventilatory depression].
[Article in Chinese]

Gao C.

Ventilatory depression and apnea are well-known early pulmonary responses of 
sepsis in infants, yet their underlying mechanisms are not understood.
To 
further elucidate the pathophysiology, we induced Escherichia coli septicemia in 
piglets and studied the sequential changes in intrapulmonary shunt (QS/QT), 
physiological dead space (VD/VT), minute ventilation (VE), and blood gases for 
up to 6 hours of lethal sepsis.
Lung lymph was also collected and extravascular 
lung water (EVLW) was measured.
Histology confirmed that interstitial edema 
developed 1 hour after E. coli infusion.
These data suggest that high 
permeability pulmonary edema and hypoxemia following early intrapulmonary shunt 
increase may be the causes of septic ventilatory depression.
PMID: 1650639 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
EFFECTS OF MELATONIN IMPLANTS ON THE CIRCADIAN RHYTHM OF PLASMA MELATONIN AND PROLACTIN IN SHEEP. 1. Endocrinology. 1982 Jun;110(6):2186-8. doi: 10.1210/endo-110-6-2186.

Effects of melatonin implants on the circadian rhythm of plasma melatonin and 
prolactin in sheep.

Kennaway DJ
 Gilmore TA, Seamark RF.
The effects of implanting Silastic capsules containing melatonin on plasma 
melatonin and prolactin levels were investigated in pinealectomized (Px) and 
sham-operated sheep (SPx).
Prior to implantation, melatonin was found in plasma 
samples obtained during the night period from SPx sheep (mean value 150 pg/ml), 
but could not be (less than 25 pg/ml) detected in plasma samples obtained during 
the day in SPx sheep or in any sample obtained during the night or day period in 
Px sheep.
Following implantation, a constant basal plasma melatonin level of 
about 165 pg/ml was established in all sheep with a superimposed nighttime rise 
in SPx animals suggesting no diminution of endogenous melatonin production 
during the dark period.
Following melatonin treatment, there was a marked 
depression in plasma prolactin levels in both SPx and Px sheep.
These results 
are interpreted to indicate that 1) there is no negative feedback of melatonin 
upon its own synthesis and release, 2) that there is no circadian change in the 
rate of metabolism of melatonin and 3) that constant melatonin availability in 
sheep caused a depression in plasma prolactin levels similar to that found 
following exposure of animals to a short day.
DOI: 10.1210/endo-110-6-2186
PMID: 7075555 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression of complement activity in three strains of mice after tumor transfer <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Both immune adherence and hemolytic complement activity were measured as a function of time after either intraperitoneal or subcutaneous injection of six transplantable tumors carried in three strains of mice. There was a lack of correlation between complement activity measured by these assays in accord with other studies on human cancer patients. The data indicate that host complement activity was depressed in all cases following tumor transfer and suggest that the serotherapy of murine tumors using passively administered anti‐tumor serum may be compromised by host complement insufficient to mediate tumor cytolysis <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>.</jats:p>
Study of the <i>in vivo</i> and <i>in vitro</i> cardiovascular effects of (+)‐glaucine and N‐carbethoxysecoglaucine in rats <jats:p>1 The cardiovascular and vasorelaxant effects of (+)‐glaucine and of a semisynthetic derivative (N‐carbethoxysecoglaucine) were studied in rats.</jats:p><jats:p>2 N‐carbethoxysecoglaucine did not modify either systolic arterial pressure or heart rate values in conscious (25 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>
 p.o.)
and anaesthetized normotensive rats (5 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>, i.v.).
Furthermore, this compound showed no activity in the experiments carried out on rat isolated aorta [contractility and <jats:sup>45</jats:sup>Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> influx assays (5 μm)] and did not modify the rate and force of contraction in rat isolated atria (5 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>).</jats:p><jats:p>3 In conscious normotensive rats, oral administration of (+)‐glaucine (25 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>) did not modify either systolic arterial pressure or heart rate.</jats:p><jats:p>4 In anaesthetized normotensive rats, (+)‐glaucine (5 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>, i.v.)
produced a remarkable fall in mean arterial pressure (MAP) accompanied by a significant decrease in heart rate.
In the same preparation, (+)‐glaucine (5 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>, i.v.)
did not modify the cardiovascular effects induced by noradrenaline (NA) (5 μg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>) and 5‐hydroxytryptamine (5‐HT) (300 μg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>) but markedly inhibited those induced by nicotine (200 μg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>).</jats:p><jats:p>5 In isolated intact aorta of rat, (+)‐glaucine (0.15‐5 μm) competitively inhibited the contractions induced by NA (with a pA<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> value of 7.14) and non‐competitively those induced by 5‐HT (in normal Krebs solution) and Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> (in depolarizing Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐free high‐K<jats:sup>+</jats:sup> 50 mM solution), with depression of the maximal response and with pD<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>′ values of 5.56 and 5.26, respectively.</jats:p><jats:p>6 In experiments in Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐free medium, (+)‐glaucine (3 μm) inhibited the contractions induced by NA and had no effect on either 5‐HT‐ or caffeine‐induced contractions.</jats:p><jats:p>7 Furthermore, in the experiments with radioactive Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>, (+)‐glaucine (3 μm) did not modify the basal uptake of <jats:sup>45</jats:sup>Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> but strongly inhibited the influx of <jats:sup>45</jats:sup>Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> induced by NA, 5‐HT and K<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>.</jats:p><jats:p>8 (+)‐Glaucine (5 μm) had no effect on rate and force of contraction in rat isolated atria.</jats:p><jats:p>9 These results indicate that: (a) the cardiovascular effects (hypotension and bradycardia) of (+)‐glaucine in anaesthetized normotensive rats (5 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>) may be due, at least in part, to a ganglioplexic effect; (b) the vasorelaxant action of (+)‐glaucine (0.15‐5 μm) in rat isolated aorta can be attributed to an α<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>adrenoceptor blocking property (which may explain its inhibition of noradrenaline‐induced <jats:sup>45</jats:sup>Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> influx and contractions in normal Krebs solution and noradrenaline‐induced contractions in Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐free medium) and to a Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐antagonist activity (which may be responsible, at least in part, for the inhibition of <jats:sup>45</jats:sup>Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> uptake induced by NA, 5‐HT and K<jats:sup>+</jats:sup> and the contractions induced by both NA and 5‐HT in normal Krebs solution and by Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> in Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐free high‐K<jats:sup>+</jats:sup> medium) and (c) there is no correlation between the mechanisms of action observed for (+)‐glaucine <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> and <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic>, which suggests that the vasorelaxant activity of this alkaloid does not contribute to its hypotensive activity.</jats:p>
Adjuvant activity of all-trans-retinoic acid in C57Bl/6 mice 1. Int J Immunopharmacol. 1992 Feb;14(2):143-50. doi:
10.1016/0192-0561(92)90024-f.

Adjuvant activity of all-trans-retinoic acid in C57Bl/6 mice.

Goettsch W(1)
 Hatori Y, Sharma RP.
Author information:
(1)Center for Environmental Toxicology, Utah State University, Logan 84322-5600.
The effects of all-trans-retinoic acid were investigated on the immune responses 
in C57Bl/6 mice after daily oral administration for one week.
In selected 
experiments the immunosuppressive chemicals, cyclophosphamide and cyclosporin A 
were used in conjunction with retinoic acid.
Retinoic acid stimulated the 
production of antibodies against sheep red blood cells and DNP-Ficoll; however, 
retinoic acid did not reverse the depression caused by immunosuppressive 
chemicals.
In non-immunized animals retinoic acid stimulated the production of 
IL-1 but not of IL-2.
The mitogenic responses of splenocytes against 
concanavalin A, phytohemagglutinin and pokeweed mitogen were depressed after the 
retinoic acid treatment; those against lipopolysaccharide were not influenced.
Treatment with retinoic acid did not alter the mixed leukocyte responses but 
increased the activity of NK cells.
Results indicate that retinoic acid may act 
as an adjuvant via activating macrophages, however, retinoic acid cannot reverse 
the immunosuppression induced by potent chemicals.
DOI: 10.1016/0192-0561(92)90024-f
PMID: 1624215 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The CD45RA+ (quiescent) cellular phenotype is overabundant relative to the CD45RA- phenotype within the involuted splenic T cell population of weanling mice subjected to wasting protein-energy malnutrition. 1. J Nutr. 1995 Oct;125(10):2471-82. doi: 10.1093/jn/125.10.2471.

The CD45RA+ (quiescent) cellular phenotype is overabundant relative to the 
CD45RA- phenotype within the involuted splenic T cell population of weanling 
mice subjected to wasting protein-energy malnutrition.

Woodward BD(1)
 Bezanson KD, Hillyer LM, Lee WH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Nutritional Sciences, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
The objective of this investigation was to determine whether an imbalance 
between naive- and memory-phenotype cells occurs within CD4+ and/or CD8+ splenic 
T cell subsets in models of protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) which produce 
wasting disease (loss of approximately 1.6% of body weight per day for 14 d) and 
profound depression in thymus-dependent immunity.
Male and female weanling mice 
of disparate inbred strains, CBA/J and C57BL/6J, were allocated to the following 
groups: zero-time control (23 d old and 19 d old, respectively), ad libitum 
intake of a complete purified diet (19% crude protein, 17 kJ/g gross energy), 
restricted intake of the complete diet, and (C57BL/6J, only) ad libitum intake 
of an isocaloric low protein diet (0.6% crude protein).
Surface expression of 
isoforms of CD45, a component of the T cell receptor complex, as well as of the 
accessory molecule, CD2, were assessed by flow cytometry of splenic mononuclear 
cell suspensions.
Both major T cell subsets in the malnourished groups contained 
a significantly higher proportion of cells expressing the surface marker, 
CD45RA, than was found in the spleen cells of the control groups.
CD45RA+ 
(naive-phenotype) T cells represent the extreme of quiescence and stringent 
activation requirements among thymic lymphocytes.
The results provide the first 
clear evidence of a T cell subset imbalance in PEM which is consistent with 
depression in acquired immunity and which occurs, apart from antigenic 
challenge, in a site wherein immune responses take place.
The T cell receptor 
complex may emerge as a focal point of the depressive influence of PEM on the 
competence of thymic lymphocytes.
DOI: 10.1093/jn/125.10.2471
PMID: 7562081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibitory effect of the antidepressant St. John's Wort (hypericum perforatum) on rat bladder contractility in vitro 1. Urology. 2004 Jul;64(1):168-72. doi: 10.1016/j.urology.2004.02.021.

Inhibitory effect of the antidepressant St. John's wort (hypericum perforatum) 
on rat bladder contractility in vitro.

Capasso R(1)
 Borrelli F, Capasso F, Mascolo N, Izzo AA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Pharmacology, University of Naples Federico II, 
Naples, Italy.
OBJECTIVES: To evaluate the effect of St. John's wort (SJW), an effective and 
safe herbal antidepressant, on rat bladder contractility.
Recent data have 
suggested a strong association between depression and urinary incontinence.
METHODS: Strips were cut from the bladder body and placed in organ baths 
containing Krebs solution.
Contractions were induced by electrical field 
stimulation (EFS) and, in some experiments, by exogenous alpha,beta 
(alpha,beta)-methylene adenosine triphosphate.
RESULTS: St. John's wort was significantly more active in inhibiting the 
EFS-induced contractions than the alpha,beta-methylene adenosine 
triphosphate-induced contractions, suggesting both a presynaptic site of action 
and a direct inhibition of bladder smooth muscle.
The inhibitory effect of SJW 
on EFS-induced contractions was unaffected by methysergide, haloperidol, 
phentolamine plus propranolol (antagonists that block the action of the 
neurotransmitters 5-hydroxytriptamine, dopamine, and noradrenaline on their own 
receptors), the L-type calcium channel antagonist verapamil, capsazepine (which 
blocks the vanilloid receptor), or cannabinoid CB1 receptor antagonist 
SR141716A.
However, the opioid receptor antagonist naloxone significantly 
reduced the inhibitory effect of SJW on EFS-induced contractions.
Among the 
chemical constituents of SJW tested, hyperforin and, to a lesser extent, the 
flavonoid kaempferol showed inhibitory effects.
CONCLUSIONS: The results of our study demonstrated that SJW inhibits excitatory 
transmission of the rat urinary bladder and also directly inhibits smooth muscle 
contractility.
The inhibitory effect on excitatory transmission could involve, 
at least in part, opioid receptors.
SJW may be evaluated for its possible use in 
treating urinary incontinence in depressed patients.
DOI: 10.1016/j.urology.2004.02.021
PMID: 15245964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Endocannabinoids mediate bidirectional striatal spike‐timing‐dependent plasticity <jats:sec><jats:title>Key points</jats:title><jats:p><jats:list list-type="bullet">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Although learning can arise from few or even a single trial
 synaptic plasticity is commonly assessed under prolonged activation.
Here, we explored the existence of rapid responsiveness of synaptic plasticity at corticostriatal synapses in a major synaptic learning rule, spike‐timing‐dependent plasticity (STDP).</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>We found that spike‐timing‐dependent depression (tLTD) progressively disappears when the number of paired stimulations (below 50 pairings) is decreased whereas spike‐timing‐dependent potentiation (tLTP) displays a biphasic profile: tLTP is observed for 75–100 pairings, is absent for 25–50 pairings and re‐emerges for 5–10 pairings.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>This tLTP induced by low numbers of pairings (5–10) depends on activation of the endocannabinoid system, type‐1 cannabinoid receptor and the transient receptor potential vanilloid type‐1.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Endocannabinoid‐tLTP may represent a physiological mechanism operating during the rapid learning of new associative memories and behavioural rules characterizing the flexible behaviour of mammals or during the initial stages of habit learning.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Synaptic plasticity, a main substrate for learning and memory, is commonly assessed with prolonged stimulations.
Since learning can arise from few or even a single trial, synaptic strength is expected to adapt rapidly.
However, whether synaptic plasticity occurs in response to limited event occurrences remains elusive.
To answer this question, we investigated whether a low number of paired stimulations can induce plasticity in a major synaptic learning rule, spike‐timing‐dependent plasticity (STDP).
It is known that 100 pairings induce bidirectional STDP, i.e.
spike‐timing‐dependent potentiation (tLTP) and depression (tLTD) at most central synapses.
In rodent striatum, we found that tLTD progressively disappears when the number of paired stimulations is decreased (below 50 pairings) whereas tLTP displays a biphasic profile: tLTP is observed for 75–100 pairings, absent for 25–50 pairings and re‐emerges for 5–10 pairings.
This tLTP, induced by very few pairings (∼5–10) depends on the endocannabinoid (eCB) system.
This eCB‐dependent tLTP (eCB‐tLTP) involves postsynaptic endocannabinoid synthesis, requires paired activity (post‐ and presynaptic) and the activation of type‐1 cannabinoid receptor (CB1R) and transient receptor potential vanilloid type‐1 (TRPV1).
eCB‐tLTP occurs in both striatopallidal and striatonigral medium‐sized spiny neurons (MSNs) and is dopamine dependent.
Lastly, we show that eCB‐LTP and eCB‐LTD can be induced sequentially in the same neuron, depending on the cellular conditioning protocol.
Thus, while endocannabinoids are usually thought simply to depress synaptic function, they also constitute a versatile system underlying bidirectional plasticity.
Our results reveal a novel form of synaptic plasticity, eCB‐tLTP, which may underlie rapid learning capabilities characterizing behavioural flexibility.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Effects of reserpine on the social behavior of rhesus monkeys. 1. Dis Nerv Syst. 1971 Nov;32(11):735-41.

Effects of reserpine on the social behavior of rhesus monkeys.

McKinney WT Jr
 Eising RG, Moran EC, Suomi SJ, Harlow HF.
PIP: Reserpine was administered daily by intubation for 81 days to 3 rhesus 
monkeys to investigate a possible relationship with depression.
Their behavior 
during the experimental period was compared to their behavior before and after 
the drug period, as well as to that of a control group of 3 monkeys given water 
instead of reserpine.
Experimental findings were as follows: 1) Reserpine caused 
significant behavioral changes in the rhesus monkey.
These changes included 
decreases in visual exploration and locomotion, and increases in self-huddling, 
posturing, and tremor; and 2) the behavioral effects of repeated daily dosage 
were not cumulative nor was tolerance developed by the drugged monkeys.
There 
was no visible effect 15 hours after each daily drug administration.
The 
behavioral alterations were not detectable more than 15 hours following each 
daily dose.
It was noted that the data were insufficient to justify the 
conclusion that reserpine administration produced depression in the monkey 
subjects, even though it did have marked behavioral effects on them.
PMID: 5002259 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Positive end-expiratory pressure
 lung stretch, and decreased myocardial contractility.
1.
Surgery.
1978 Jul;84(1):127-33.
Positive end-expiratory pressure, lung stretch, and decreased myocardial 
contractility.
Manny J, Grindlinger G, Mathé AA, Hechtman HB.
PMID: 351839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reactions of lateral geniculate cells to chemical and electrical excitation of the visual cortex in rabbits <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>In anesthetized and paralyzed rabbits unitary discharges of lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) were studied after cortical excitation by strychnine and following electrical stimulation of the visual cortex (VC). Results showed that local application of strychnine produced a general increase of the spontaneous and evoked activity of geniculate cells. By contrast
 cortical depression with KCl led to a differential decrement of one of the evoked responses (on or off).
Electrical cortical stimulation paired with on or off stimuli led to a differential increment of on or off responses.
The results support the notion that, in rabbits, the corticogeniculate system is center‐surround organized.
A diagrammatic model is proposed to account for the relationship between the VC and the LGN in rabbits.</jats:p>
Chronic ω-3 fatty acids supplementation promotes beneficial effects on anxiety
 cognitive and depressive-like behaviors in rats subjected to a restraint stress protocol 1.
Behav Brain Res.
2011 May 16;219(1):116-22. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.12.028.
Epub  2010 Dec 27.
Chronic ω-3 fatty acids supplementation promotes beneficial effects on anxiety, 
cognitive and depressive-like behaviors in rats subjected to a restraint stress 
protocol.
Ferraz AC(1), Delattre AM, Almendra RG, Sonagli M, Borges C, Araujo P, Andersen 
ML, Tufik S, Lima MM.
Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Neurofisiologia, Departamento de Fisiologia, Universidade 
Federal do Paraná, 81.531-990 Curitiba, PR, Brazil.
anete@ufpr.br

Recent evidence has demonstrated dietary influence on the manifestation of 
different types of behaviors induced by stressor tasks.
The present study 
examined the impact of ω-3 polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) supplementation 
in an early phase of the brain development with the goal of preventing or even 
attenuating the occurrence of stress-related behaviors such as depressive-like 
behaviors, anxiety and cognitive dysfunctions in male rats subjected to 
restraint stress.
Our results indicated that the supplementation regimen 
successfully counteracted the anxiogenic effects of stress as evidenced by the 
rats' increased exploration time in the aversive arms of the elevated plus maze.
The forced swimming test indicated that immobility and swimming were more deeply 
influenced by PUFAs supplementation, thereby demonstrating an antidepressant 
effect.
Furthermore, cognitive function was shown to be intensely affected by 
restraint stress, but the effects were surprisingly counteracted by the PUFAs 
supplementation.
Lastly, plasmatic corticosterone levels were demonstrated to be 
drastically increased by the restraint stress; however, PUFAs supplementation 
promoted a reduction of this stress-related hormone to levels that were 
comparable to those observed in the control group.
Our results suggested that 
the mechanisms underlying these effects are possibly associated with the 
reduction of corticosterone levels promoted by the PUFAs supplementation in the 
stress-induced animals.
Further studies to examine the participation of PUFAs in 
mediating different behaviors in rats subjected to restraint stress are 
warranted.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.12.028
PMID: 21192985 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Benzodiazepine withdrawal facilitates the subsequent onset of escape failures and anhedonia: influence of different antidepressant drugs 1. Brain Res. 1999 Feb 20;819(1-2):40-7. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(98)01341-9.

Benzodiazepine withdrawal facilitates the subsequent onset of escape failures 
and anhedonia: influence of different antidepressant drugs.

Lacerra C(1)
 Martijena ID, Bustos SG, Molina VA.
Author information:
(1)Departamento de Farmacología, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad 
Nacional de Córdoba, Ciudad Universitaria, 5000, Córdoba, Argentina.
The effect of benzodiazepine (BDZ) withdrawal on escape acquisition and on the 
behavioral response to two different reinforcing stimuli was investigated.
In 
addition, the influence of antidepressant drugs (AD) differing in their 
mechanism of action on these behavioral outputs was also evaluated.
Rats 
subjected to withdrawal from a chronic treatment with diazepam (DZM; 2 mg/kg per 
day, i.p.)
during 21 days were subsequently exposed to a brief inescapable shock 
session (IS) and 48 h later to an active avoidance test.
Only withdrawn animals 
exposed to the IS exhibited enhanced escape failures.
In an additional 
experiment, withdrawn rats were repeatedly administered with vehicle (VEH), 
desipramine (DMI; 5 mg/kg, i.p.
), fluoxetine (FLU; 5 mg/kg, i.p.)
or phenelzine 
(PHEN; 5 mg/kg, i.p.)
and subsequently exposed to IS and to active avoidance 
task.
A significant reversal of escape deficit was only observed following DMI 
and PHEN but not after FLU.
Furthermore, withdrawn rats showed a reduced 
preference for a sexually relevant olfactory cue, this reduced sensitivity was 
only normalized following DMI but not after the administration of FLU or PHEN.
Finally, rats exposed to abrupt cessation of chronic BDZ administration did not 
exhibit preference for a context previously associated with amphetamine (AMP) 
under the conditioned place preference (CPP) procedure.
All these findings are 
indicative that BDZ withdrawal facilitates the subsequent occurrence of 
behavioral changes-escape failures and reduced behavioral response to rewarding 
stimuli-suggested to parallel important symptoms of human depression.
In 
addition, DMI seems to be much more effective in restoring such behavioral 
abnormalities as compared to a MAO inhibitor and to a inhibitor of 5-HT uptake.
Copyright 1999 Published by ELsevier Science B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(98)01341-9
PMID: 10082859 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Inhibition of proliferation of hepatic stellate cells by taurine is mediated via regulating cell cycle proteins]. 1. Zhonghua Gan Zang Bing Za Zhi. 2005 Aug;13(8):571-4.

[Inhibition of proliferation of hepatic stellate cells by taurine is mediated 
via regulating cell cycle proteins].

[Article in Chinese]

Chen YX(1)
 Chen SW, Zhang XR, Liu S, Xie WF, Li S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Gastroenterology, Changzheng Hospital, Second Military Medical 
University, Shanghai 200003, China.
chenyuexiang@hotmail.com

OBJECTIVE: To explore the possible mechanism(s) of taurine-inhibiting the 
proliferation of hepatic stellate cells (HSC), this study investigated the 
effect of taurine on the HSC cell cycle and its regulatory protein expression.
METHODS: Cell proliferation was assessed by MTT assay.
Cell cycle was analyzed 
by flow cytometry.
Cell cycle regulatory protein Cyclin D1 and P21waf1 
expression were determined by immunocytochemistry and image-analysis system, and 
real-time quantitative PCR.
RESULTS: HSC proliferation was markedly inhibited when HSC were treated with 
taurine at concentrations of 5, 10, 20, 30, 40 and 50 mmol/L for 48 hours, and 
the inhibition rates were 6.7%, 14.4%, 23.3%, 32.2%, 36.7% and 45.6% 
respectively (P < 0.05-0.01).
In the flow cytometry analysis, it was found that 
taurine could block HSC in the G0/G1 phase from entering the S phase, resulting 
in more cells in the G0/G1 phase and fewer in the S phase.
The percentage of the 
cells in the G0/G1 phase and the S phase at the dosage of 40 mmol/L were 
68.2%+/-1.4% and 26.2+/-1.3% respectively, which was significantly different in 
comparison to the controls (56.2%+/-1.7% and 38.5%+/-0.8% respectively, P < 
0.01).
HSC expressed cyclin D1 and P21waf1.
Taurine inhibited cyclin D1 
expression and induced P21waf1 expression.
The cyclin D1 protein and mRNA in the 
HSC treated with 40 mmol/L taurine were significantly reduced compared with the 
controls [protein (optical density value): 0.13+/-0.02 versus 0.18+/-0.02, P < 
0.01; mRNA: 5776.7+/-3345.0 versus 18,400.6+/-1374.8 copies/10(6) GAPDH, P < 
0.01]; and the P21waf1 protein and mRNA were markedly increased compared with 
the controls [protein (optical density value): 0.19+/-0.02 versus 0.14+/-0.01, P 
< 0.01; mRNA: 44,866.7+/-3910.7 versus 16,933.3+/-960.9 copies/10(6) GAPDH, P 
less than 0.05].
CONCLUSIONS: Cyclin D1 and P21waf1 were cell cycle regulatory proteins in HSC, 
and taurine can inhibit the HSC cyclin D1 expression and stimulate P21waf1 
expression, facilitate arresting cells in G0/G1 phase, and suppress cell 
proliferation.
PMID: 16092977 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The causes and value of hyperphosphatemia in experimental strangulation obstruction. 1. Surgery. 1989 Nov;106(5):879-83.

The causes and value of hyperphosphatemia in experimental strangulation 
obstruction.

Shikata J(1)
 Kohno K, Shida T, Miyaji S, Kohdaira F.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Teikyo University School of Medicine, Tokyo, Japan.
In model experiments with mongrel dogs, intestinal strangulation obstruction was 
induced by occluding the superior mesenteric veins, and a rise in the inorganic 
phosphate value of the blood was observed.
The high inorganic phosphate values 
of the fluid exuding from the strangulated bowel suggest that intestinal factors 
associated with the strangulated bowel may be partly responsible for this 
elevated phosphatemia.
However, hyperphosphatemia was also found in a model 
experiment in which the route through which the fluid was absorbed into the 
blood from the peritoneal cavity was interrupted by keeping the strangulated 
bowel in an intestinal bag.
After this, in the model experiments in which a 
systemic blood pressure depression curve with a percentage reduction similar to 
that of the decreasing arterial blood pressure resulting from strangulation was 
produced (by exsanguination, and even by exsanguination with adequate perfusion 
of the gut), plasma inorganic phosphate values also increased.
Therefore it is 
undeniable that systemic factors other than the above-mentioned local factors 
are related to the rise in plasma inorganic phosphate values in experimental 
strangulation obstruction.
Because it is not possible to assert that 
phosphatemia is specific to intestinal strangulation, the importance of a rise 
in inorganic phosphate values in the early diagnosis of intestinal strangulation 
cannot be considered very great.
PMID: 2814822 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Combined atorvastatin and coenzyme Q10 improve the left ventricular function in isoproterenol-induced heart failure in rat 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Sep;666(1-3):135-41. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.04.061. 
Epub 2011 May 9.

Combined atorvastatin and coenzyme Q10 improve the left ventricular function in 
isoproterenol-induced heart failure in rat.

Garjani A(1)
 Andalib S, Biabani S, Soraya H, Doustar Y, Garjani A, 
Maleki-Dizaji N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Tabriz 
University of Medical Sciences, Tabriz, Iran.
The effect of atorvastatin on cardiac remodeling, function, and homodynamic 
parameters in isoproterenol-induced heart failure was evaluated in the present 
study.
A subcutaneous injection of isoproterenol (5mg/kg/day) for 10 days was 
used for the induction of heart failure.
Isoproterenol administration produced 
intensive myocardial necrosis and fibrosis with a significant decrease in the 
arterial pressure indices, heart rate, contractility (LVdP/dt(max)) and 
relaxation (LVdP/dt(min)), but an increase in the left ventricular end-diastolic 
pressure.
Rats were randomly assigned to control, treatment with only 
atorvastatin, and treatment with atorvastatin plus coenzyme Q10.
Histopathological analysis showed a marked attenuation of myocyte necrosis and 
interstitial fibrosis in all atorvastatin treated groups (P<0.001).
A low dose 
of atorvastatin (5mg/kg/day) significantly improved the left ventricular 
systolic pressure, contractility and relaxation (P<0.01).
On the contrary, a 
high dose of atorvastatin (20mg/kg/day) worsened the isoproterenol-induced left 
ventricular dysfunction by a further reduction of LVdP/dt(max) from +2780 ± 94 
to +1588 ± 248 (mmHg/s; P<0.01) and LVdP/dt(min) from -2007 ± 190 to -2939 ± 291 
(mmHg/s; P<0.05).
Co-administration of coenzyme Q10 with atorvastatin reversed 
the hemodynamic depression and the left ventricular dysfunction to a high level 
(P<0.001).
There was a lower level of LVEDPs in the atorvastatin+coenzyme Q10 
treated groups (3 ± 1 and 4 ± 1.4 versus 8 ± 3.5 and 14 ± 3.6 mmHg, 
respectively), thereby suggesting improvement in the myocardial stiffness by the 
combined coenzyme Q10 and atorvastatin treatment.
The atorvastatin therapy 
attenuated myocardial necrosis and fibrosis in isoproterenol-induced heart 
failure.
However, a high dose of the drug considerably worsened the left 
ventricular dysfunction and hemodynamic depression, which was reversed by 
coenzyme Q10 co-administration.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2011.04.061
PMID: 21570962 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Studies on the effects of antidepressant drugs on the antinociceptive action of morphine and on plasma morphine in rat and man 1. Pain. 1990 Nov;43(2):155-162. doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(90)91068-T.

Studies on the effects of antidepressant drugs on the antinociceptive action of 
morphine and on plasma morphine in rat and man.

Ventafridda V(1)
 Blanchi M, Ripamonti C, Sacerdote P, De Conno F, Zecca E, 
Panerai AE.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Milan, 20129 Milan Italy Pain 
Therapy Division, National Cancer Institute, 20133 Milan Italy.
In the rat we studied the effect of 3 tricyclic antidepressants: 
chlorimipramine, amitriptyline and nortriptyline, and the atypical 
antidepressant trazodone on pain thresholds when administered alone or together 
with morphine.
Moreover, we evaluated the effect of the antidepressants on free 
morphine plasma concentrations both in the rat and in man.
We observed that 
chlorimipramine and amitriptyline, two tricyclic antidepressants active on the 
serotoninergic system, induce analgesia and potentiate morphine analgesia in a 
dose-related fashion.
The noradrenergic tricyclic nortriptyline and trazodone 
did not elicit analgesia and inconsistently affected morphine analgesia.
In the 
rat, all drugs tested increased plasma concentrations of morphine with the 
exception of amitriptyline.
In man, only chlorimipramine and amitriptyline 
increased the plasma concentration of the free opiate.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3959(90)91068-T
PMID: 2087328 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Changes in socio-emotional behavior under imipramine treatment in normal and amygdalo-hypothalamic dogs. 1. Acta Neurobiol Exp (Wars). 1986;46(4):187-203.

Changes in socio-emotional behavior under imipramine treatment in normal and 
amygdalo-hypothalamic dogs.

Kostarczyk E
 Fonberg E, Prechtl JC.
The effects of imipramine on learned social responses were examined in ten dogs 
with dorsomedial amygdalar lesions and/or lateral hypothalamic lesions.
Six of 
the ten dogs were also tested preoperatively.
The social responses were 
instrumentally conditioned using social interaction with the experimenter as 
reinforcement (petting and verbal reassurance).
In the non-lesioned dogs 
imipramine treatment produced a dose-dependent deterioration of performance 
during drug administration followed by a long-term amelioration of performance.
In the lesioned dogs imipramine produced various changes in performance 
depending on the pretreatment level of responding.
When the pretreatment level 
of performance was high drug administration resulted in a long-term 
deterioration, and when performance was poor imipramine produced a continuous 
and long-term increase.
It is suggested that imipramine facilitates the recovery 
of performance, but suppresses well-performed responses.
PMID: 3788669 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Heterosynaptic Plasticity Prevents Runaway Synaptic Dynamics <jats:p>Spike timing-dependent plasticity (STDP) and other conventional Hebbian-type plasticity rules are prone to produce runaway dynamics of synaptic weights. Once potentiated
 a synapse would have higher probability to lead to spikes and thus to be further potentiated, but once depressed, a synapse would tend to be further depressed.
The runaway synaptic dynamics can be prevented by precisely balancing STDP rules for potentiation and depression; however, experimental evidence shows a great variety of potentiation and depression windows and magnitudes.
Here we show that modifications of synapses to layer 2/3 pyramidal neurons from rat visual and auditory cortices in slices can be induced by intracellular tetanization: bursts of postsynaptic spikes without presynaptic stimulation.
Induction of these heterosynaptic changes depended on the rise of intracellular calcium, and their direction and magnitude correlated with initial state of release mechanisms.
We suggest that this type of plasticity serves as a mechanism that stabilizes the distribution of synaptic weights and prevents their runaway dynamics.
To test this hypothesis, we develop a cortical neuron model implementing both homosynaptic (STDP) and heterosynaptic plasticity with properties matching the experimental data.
We find that heterosynaptic plasticity effectively prevented runaway dynamics for the tested range of STDP and input parameters.
Synaptic weights, although shifted from the original, remained normally distributed and nonsaturated.
Our study presents a biophysically constrained model of how the interaction of different forms of plasticity—Hebbian and heterosynaptic—may prevent runaway synaptic dynamics and keep synaptic weights unsaturated and thus capable of further plastic changes and formation of new memories.</jats:p>
Dysregulation of Neuregulin-1/ErbB signaling in the prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of rats exposed to chronic unpredictable mild stress 1. Physiol Behav. 2016 Feb 1;154:145-50. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.11.023. Epub
 2015 Nov 25.

Dysregulation of Neuregulin-1/ErbB signaling in the prefrontal cortex and 
hippocampus of rats exposed to chronic unpredictable mild stress.

Dang R(1)
 Cai H(2), Zhang L(3), Liang D(3), Lv C(3), Guo Y(4), Yang R(3), Zhu 
Y(2), Jiang P(5).
Author information:
(1)Institute of Clinical Pharmacy & Pharmacology, Jining First People's 
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining 272000, China; Department of 
Pharmacy, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, Changsha 410010, 
China.
(2)Department of Pharmacy, Second Xiangya Hospital, Central South University, 
Changsha 410010, China.
(3)Institute of Clinical Pharmacy & Pharmacology, Jining First People's 
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining 272000, China.
(4)Institute of Clinical Pharmacy & Pharmacology, Jining First People's 
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining 272000, China.
Electronic address: 
gyj99@126.com.
(5)Institute of Clinical Pharmacy & Pharmacology, Jining First People's 
Hospital, Jining Medical University, Jining 272000, China.
Electronic address: 
jiangpeicsu@sina.com.
Exposure to chronic stress increases the likelihood of developing depression, 
but the underlying mechanisms remain equivocal.
While recent evidence has 
indicated that Neuregulin-1 (NRG1) and its ErbB receptors play an essential role 
in neural development and function, and NRG1 has emerged as a novel modulator 
involved in the response of brain to stress, there is limited evidence 
concerning the effects of chronic stress exposure on NRG1/ErbB signaling.
To 
fill this critical gap, we examined the protein expression of NRG1 and ErbB 
receptors in the brain of rats following chronic unpredictable mild stress 
(CUMS) exposure.
After 6weeks of CUMS procedures, the rats were induced to a 
depression-like state.
The stressed rats displayed elevated expression of NRG1 
and phosphorylated ErbB4 (pErbB4) in the prefrontal cortex, whereas ErbB2 and 
pErbB2 were inhibited.
In the hippocampus, CUMS also attenuated activation of 
the both ErbB receptors and suppressed the downstream Akt and ERK 
phosphorylation.
Meanwhile, administration of sertraline enhanced NRG1/ErbB 
signaling and partly normalized the stress-induced behavioral changes and the 
disturbances of NRG1/ErbB system in CUMS rats.
Combined, our data firstly showed 
the aberrant changes of NRG1/ErbB system in the brain of the animal model of 
depression, providing new evidence for the involvement of NRG1/ErbB pathway in 
the development and treatment of depression.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2015.11.023
PMID: 26626816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hepatotoxicity and secondary photosensitization in a red kangaroo (Megaleia rufus) due to ingestion of Lantana camara. 1. J Zoo Wildl Med. 1998 Jun;29(2):203-7.

Hepatotoxicity and secondary photosensitization in a red kangaroo (Megaleia 
rufus) due to ingestion of Lantana camara.

Johnson JH(1)
 Jensen JM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Large Animal Medicine and Surgery, College of Veterinary 
Medicine, Texas A&M University, College Station 77843-4475, USA.
Three red kangaroos (Megaleira rufus), an adult male, an adult female, and a 
yearling, were exposed in bedding and food to coastal bermuda hay that contained 
the toxic plant Lantana camara.
The adult male exhibited signs of anorexia, 
depression, lethargy, and jaundice.
The adult female was presented dead.
After 1 
wk, following exposure to sunlight, the adult male and a yearling joey developed 
exudative dermatitis of the ear margins, eyelids, muzzle, and scrotum and 
opacity of the corneas.
The adult male had a leucocytosis, anemia, 
bilirubinemia, bilirubinuria, hyperproteinemia, and elevated alanine 
aminotransferase, gamma glutamyl transpeptidase, alkaline phosphatase, and bile 
acid serum levels.
Postmortem examination of the adult male revealed jaundice, 
and the liver was swollen, mottled, and pale yellow to reddish yellow.
The gall 
bladder was markedly distended.
Histopathologically, there was hepatocellular 
enlargement with vesiculation of the nuclei and sporadic feathery degeneration 
of the cytoplasm.
The yearling joey survived and was treated symptomatically 
with i.v.
fluids and antibiotics.
The history, clinical signs, diagnostic 
findings, necropsy findings, and exposure to the toxic plant Lantana camara 
support the diagnosis of secondary photosensitization and hepatoxicity.
PMID: 9732038 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
How a Turtle's Shell Helps It Survive Prolonged Anoxic Acidosis <jats:p>Anoxic turtles accumulate high levels of lactate in blood. To avoid fatal acidosis
 turtles exploit buffer reserves in their large mineralized shell.
The shell acts by releasing calcium and magnesium carbonates and by storing and buffering lactic acid.
Together with profound metabolic depression, shell buffering permits survival without oxygen for several months at 3°C.</jats:p>
A study of technetium-labelled sulphide colloid uptake by regional lymph nodes draining a tumour-bearing area <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>With appropriate controls
 experimental groups of inbred C3H mice bearing a syngeneic mammary carcinoma challenge in their right rear footpads were injected in both rear footpads with 99Tcm ASC.
Mice were sacrificed 15 and 90 min after the labelled colloid injection.
Popliteal and sacral lymph nodes were weighed and counted in a well scintillation counter.
A marked inhibition of labelled colloid uptake was demonstrated in regional lymph nodes draining a tumour-bearing area.</jats:p>
               <jats:p>Rabbits bearing VX2 carcinoma in a forelimb received 99Tcm ASC into each front footpad.
Depression of labelled colloid uptake by regional lymph nodes draining tumour was evident on gamma-camera scanning.</jats:p>
Serotonin Depletion Leads to Cortical Hyperexcitability and Trigeminal Nociceptive Facilitation via the Nitric Oxide Pathway <jats:p>(<jats:italic>Headache</jats:italic> 2011;51:1152‐1160)</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Objective.—</jats:bold> To investigate the role of nitric oxide (NO) in the development of cortical hyperexcitability and trigeminal nociceptive facilitation induced by serotonin (5‐HT) depletion.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Background.—</jats:bold> Nitric oxide and 5‐HT are important in the pathogenesis of primary headaches. An increase in cortical excitability and trigeminal nociception has been demonstrated in animals with low 5‐HT levels. Although the mechanism underlying this increase is unclear
 an alteration of the NO system is one possible explanation.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Methods.—</jats:bold> Male Wistar rats were divided into control and 5‐HT‐depleted groups.
5‐HT was depleted by i.p.
injection of parachlorophenylalanine (100 mg/kg).
Three days after injection, a microelectrode was inserted into the cerebral cortex for electrocorticograph recording and waves of cortical spreading depression (CSD) were triggered with KCl application.
N‐nitro‐L‐arginine methyl ester (L‐NAME; 10 mg/kg by i.v.
injection) or saline was given after the second CSD wave.
Following the experiment, the cerebral cortex and brain stem were removed for anti‐neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) and anti‐Fos immunohistochemistry.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Results.—</jats:bold> Relative to the control group, the 5‐HT‐depleted group exhibited a higher frequency of CSD waves, more nNOS‐immunoreactive cells in both the cerebral cortex and brainstem and more Fos‐immunoreactive cells in the trigeminal nucleus caudalis (TNC).
In the control group, L‐NAME application led to fewer nNOS‐immunoreactive cells in the cerebral cortex and TNC, and fewer Fos‐immunoreactive cells in the TNC; however, L‐NAME was without effect on the CSD pattern.
By contrast, in addition to decreased nNOS and Fos expression, L‐NAME significantly reduced the frequency of CSD events in the 5‐HT‐depleted group.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Conclusions.—</jats:bold> Inhibition of NO production can counter both the cortical hyperexcitability and facilitation of trigeminal nociception that develop in the depleted 5‐HT state.
Therefore, NO is likely involved in the increase in both CSD events and CSD‐evoked trigeminal nociception under decreased 5‐HT conditions.</jats:p>
Cerebrovascular and cerebral metabolic effects of clurazepam and a benzodiazepine antagonist
 3-hydroxymethyl-β-carboline 1.
Eur J Pharmacol.
1984 Nov 27;106(3):585-91. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(84)90062-1.
Cerebrovascular and cerebral metabolic effects of flurazepam and a 
benzodiazepine antagonist, 3-hydroxymethyl-beta-carboline.
Hoffman WE, Feld JM, Larscheid P, Cook JM, Albrecht RF, Miletich DJ.
There is a need in clinical practice for an antagonist which can reverse the 
sedative action of benzodiazepines.
Recently, 3-hydroxymethyl-beta-carboline 
(3-HMC) has been reported to inhibit the sleep inducing effects of flurazepam.
The effects of flurazepam (0.5, 5 and 50 mg/kg) on cerebral blood flow (CBF) and 
cerebral O2 consumption (CMRO2) were evaluated in rats and the ability of 3-HMC 
to reverse these changes was determined.
Regional CBF was measured with 
radioactive microspheres and cortical CMRO2 was calculated from sagittal 
sinus-arterial O2 content differences and cortical CBF.
Flurazepam produced dose 
dependent decreases in CBF and CMRO2 which were significant at 5 and 50 mg/kg.
3-HMC (5 mg/kg) inhibited flurazepam induced changes at the 5 mg/kg dose but had 
little effect on the CBF and CMRO2 depression produced by 50 mg/kg flurazepam.
At a dose of 25 mg/kg, 3-HMC inhibited the effects of both 5 and 50 mg/kg 
flurazepam.
Blood pressure and heart rate were also decreased by flurazepam but 
these variables were not reversed as effectively by 3-HMC treatment.
The results 
indicate that 3-HMC is an active antagonist of the cerebrovascular and cerebral 
metabolic depression produced by flurazepam and can stimulate CBF and CMRO2 at 
high doses when given alone.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(84)90062-1
PMID: 6519176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Acute and chronic effects of desipramine administration to rhesus monkeys 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1987 Apr 7;136(1):63-8. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(87)90779-5.

Acute and chronic effects of desipramine administration to rhesus monkeys.

Insel TR
 Lane EA, Sheinin M, Linnoila M.

Rhesus monkeys were studied for changes in noradrenergic functioning before and 
after chronic oral administration (28 days) of the tricyclic antidepressant 
desipramine (DMI).
Decreases in cerebrospinal fluid concentration of the 
norepinephrine metabolite MHPG were evident following the first dose (5.0 mg/kg) 
of DMI, but not after chronic administration of the drug.
The alpha 
2-adrenoceptor agonist clonidine reduced plasma norepinephrine prior to DMI 
treatment, but not after 28 days of treatment with DMI.
These adaptive changes 
in noradrenergic function were evident in spite of very low plasma levels of DMI 
due to rapid metabolism of the drug in the rhesus monkey.
The development of 
changes compatible with alpha 2-adrenoceptor subsensitivity in the presence of 
plasma levels of the drug that are well below those considered therapeutic in 
the treatment of depression suggests that such a receptor change may be 
dissociated from the drug's antidepressant effect.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(87)90779-5
PMID: 3595717 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Inactivation of sodium permeability of a nerve fiber membrane by means of formamide]. 1. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR. 1980;250(1):229-32.

[Inactivation of sodium permeability of a nerve fiber membrane by means of 
formamide].

[Article in Russian]

Peganov EM.

PMID: 6247129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Negative Affect and Voluntary Alcohol Consumption in Wistar–Kyoto (WKY) and Sprague–Dawley Rats 1. Physiol Behav. 1999 Aug;67(2):219-25. doi: 10.1016/s0031-9384(99)00054-2.

Negative affect and voluntary alcohol consumption in Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) and 
Sprague-Dawley rats.

Paré AM(1)
 Paré WP, Kluczynski J.
Author information:
(1)Washington College, Chestertown, MD 21620, USA.
wpare@aol.com

Based on the assumption that the Wistar-Kyoto (WKY) rat strain represents an 
animal model for depressive behavior, the purported relationship between 
depression and alcohol consumption was investigated in three experiments.
WKY 
rats consumed more alcohol than Sprague-Dawley (S-D) rats when offered a choice 
between a 7% alcohol solution and tap water.
Subsequently, the severity of 
stress-induced stomach ulcers was significantly less in WKY rats that had access 
to alcohol.
In Experiment 2, WKY and S-D rats were assigned to either an alcohol 
access treatment or to a water-only treatment for 27 days and subsequently 
observed in the open-field test (OFT) and the elevated plus-maze (EPM).
Access 
to alcohol reduced response latency in the OFT, and increased the percent time 
in the open arm and the total number of arm entries in the EPM for WKY rats.
In 
Experiment 3, the antidepressant, imipramine, reduced alcohol consumption in 
both strains and significantly increased percent time in the open arms of the 
EPM for WKY rats.
These studies support the assumption that depression and 
alcohol consumption may be related.
DOI: 10.1016/s0031-9384(99)00054-2
PMID: 10477053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Arsenic down-regulates the expression of Camk4
 an important gene related to cerebellar LTD in mice 1.
Neurotoxicol Teratol.
2009 Sep-Oct;31(5):318-22. doi:
10.1016/j.ntt.2009.04.064.
Epub 2009 May 4.
Arsenic down-regulates the expression of Camk4, an important gene related to 
cerebellar LTD in mice.
Wang Y(1), Li S, Piao F, Hong Y, Liu P, Zhao Y.
Author information:
(1)Department of Occupational and Environmental of Health, Dalian Medical 
University, Liaoning, PR China.
To elucidate the molecular mechanism of arsenic (As) on motor learning and 
memory, concentration of As in cerebellar tissue of mice exposed to 1 ppm and 4 
ppm As(2)O(3) subchronically was determined by ICP-MS, neurobehavioral changes 
associated with memory was examined by the Morris Water Maze test, and the 
critical gene expression profiles related to the Creb-dependent phase of 
cerebellar long-term depression (LTD) were analyzed by GeneChip.
Our results 
showed the increased level of As concentration in cerebellar tissue of the 
exposed mice in a dose-response manner, longer escape latency in the 
experimental group than controls and the down-regulated expression of 
Ca(2+)/calmodulin dependent protein kinase IV (Camk4), a very important 
regulator in the LTD pathway.
We further analyzed the influence of As on 
cerebellar Camk4 expression by Western blot.
The quantity of Camk4 band in the 
group exposed to 4 ppm As(2)O(3) significantly decreased compared to the control 
group, agreeing well with gene microarray results.
It is indicated that the 
accumulated As induced learning and memory impairment and impeded the Camk4 
expression.
Therefore, the Camk4 may be target of As-induced neurotoxicity.
Furthermore, the intervention of antioxidants taurine or vitamin C did not 
prevent Camk4 from down-regulation, indicating that the down-regulation of Camk4 
expression by As may be via an oxidation-independent way.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ntt.2009.04.064
PMID: 19410645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant effect of the extracts from Fructus Akebiae 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2010 Jan;94(3):488-95. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2009.11.003.  Epub 2009 Nov 17.

Antidepressant effect of the extracts from Fructus Akebiae.

Zhou D(1)
 Jin H, Lin HB, Yang XM, Cheng YF, Deng FJ, Xu JP.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Southern 
Medical University, Guangzhou, 510515, PR China.
Fructus Akebiae is a common ingredient in many traditional Chinese medicine 
complex prescriptions for the treatment of mental disorders.
Previous studies 
indicate that the main chemical compositions of Fructus Akebiae are triterpenoid 
saponins with hederagenin as their sapogenin.
In the present study, we enriched 
hederagenin from the extracts of Fructus Akebiae with a purity of approximately 
70%.
Using behavioral tests sensitive to antidepressant drugs, we demonstrated 
that acute and sub-chronic administration of the extracts of Fructus Akebiae 
produced antidepressant-like effects, as evidenced by decreases in the duration 
of immobility in forced swim and tail suspension tests in mice and reversal of 
chronic unpredicted mild stress-induced inhibition of sucrose consumption in 
rats.
In addition, the extracts decreased the levels of plasma 
adrenocorticotrophic hormone and serum corticosterone in rats exposed to chronic 
unpredicted mild stress.
Both behavioral and biochemical effects of the extracts 
were mimicked by the proven antidepressant escitalopram.
These results suggest 
that the extracts of Fructus Akebiae exert antidepressant activity.
Administration of the extracts may be beneficial for patients with depressive 
disorders.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2009.11.003
PMID: 19931301 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Voltage-Activated Sodium Current Is Inhibited by Capsaicin in Rat Atrial Myocytes 1. Biochem Biophys Res Commun. 2001 Apr 13;282(4):965-70. doi: 
10.1006/bbrc.2001.4688.

Voltage-activated sodium current is inhibited by capsaicin in rat atrial 
myocytes.

Milesi V(1)
 Rebolledo A, Alvis AG, Raingo J, Grassi de Gende AO.
Author information:
(1)Anatomía y Fisiología, Departamento de Ciencias Biológicas, Facultad de 
Ciencias Exactas, Universidad Nacional de La Plata, Calles 47 y 115, La Plata 
(1900), Argentina.
veronica@hanuel.biol.unlp.edu.ar

The effects of capsaicin, the active principle of hot pepper genus Capsicum, 
were studied on voltage-activated, tetrodotoxin-sensitive Na+ currents in 
isolated rat atrial cells using the patch clamp technique in the whole-cell 
configuration.
0.4 and 4 microM of capsaicin produced a significant tonic block 
on voltage-activated Na+ current (I(Na)) evoked by a depolarizing step to -40 mV 
from a holding potential of -100 mV (49 +/- 7% n = 11, P < 0.05 and 72 +/- 13% n 
= 4, P < 0.05 respectively).
We didn't observe any use-dependent block of 
capsaicin in our experimental conditions.
Capsaicin slowed the time decay of 
inactivation of I(Na), and increased the time constant of the recovery of 
inactivation.
Capsaicin and tetrodotoxin (TTX) depressed contractility of 
isolated electrically driven left rat atria, being the depression of maximal 
velocity of force development (dF/dt(max)) with respect to control values of 19 
+/- 3% at 1 microM of capsaicin and 22 +/- 2% at 1 microM of TTX.
These results 
show an inhibitory effect of capsaicin on I(Na) in isolated atrial cells that 
may modify the electrical and contractile function of the rat heart.
Copyright 2001 Academic Press.
DOI: 10.1006/bbrc.2001.4688
PMID: 11352646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Influence of various drugs on liver glycogen and blood sugar levels in reserpinized rats. Combined effect of MAOI
 5HTP, DOPA, ACTH and cortisone].
1.
Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi.
1971;67(3):265-73.
[Influence of various drugs on liver glycogen and blood sugar levels in 
reserpinized rats.
Combined effect of MAOI, 5HTP, DOPA, ACTH and cortisone].
[Article in Japanese]

Kobayashi M, Nino T, Mori T, Fukuyo S, Yazawa T.

PMID: 4326925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Linoleic Acid Derivative DCP-LA Ameliorates Stress-Induced Depression-Related Behavior by Promoting Cell Surface 5-HT1A Receptor Translocation
 Stimulating Serotonin Release, and Inactivating GSK-3β 1.
Mol Neurobiol.
2015 Apr;51(2):523-32. doi: 10.1007/s12035-014-8718-5.
Epub
2014  May 1.
Linoleic acid derivative DCP-LA ameliorates stress-induced depression-related 
behavior by promoting cell surface 5-HT1A receptor translocation, stimulating 
serotonin release, and inactivating GSK-3β.
Kanno T(1), Tanaka A, Nishizaki T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Bioinformation, Department of Physiology, Hyogo College of 
Medicine, Nishinomiya, Japan.
Impairment of serotonergic neurotransmission is the major factor responsible for 
depression and glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK-3β) participates in serotonergic 
transmission-mediated signaling networks relevant to mental illnesses.
In the 
forced-swim test to assess depression-like behavior, the immobility time for 
mice with restraint stress was significantly longer than that for nonstressed 
control mice.
Postsynaptic cell surface localization of 5-HT1A receptor, but not 
5-HT2A receptor, in the hypothalamus for mice with restraint stress was 
significantly reduced as compared with that for control mice, which highly 
correlated to prolonged immobility time, i.e., depression-like behavior.
The 
linoleic acid derivative 8-[2-(2-pentyl-cyclopropylmethyl)-cyclopropyl]-octanoic 
acid (DCP-LA) restored restraint stress-induced reduction of cell surface 5-HT1A 
receptor and improved depression-like behavior in mice with restraint stress.
Moreover, DCP-LA stimulated serotonin release from hypothalamic slices and 
cancelled restraint stress-induced reduction of GSK-3β phosphorylation at Ser9.
Taken together, the results of the present study indicate that DCP-LA could 
ameliorate depression-like behavior by promoting translocation of 5-HT1A 
receptor to the plasma membrane on postsynaptic cells, stimulating serotonin 
release, and inactivating GSK-3β.
DOI: 10.1007/s12035-014-8718-5
PMID: 24788685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Ethanol Dependence and Withdrawal on the Catecholamines in Rat Brain and Heart <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> To study whether ethanol dependence is accompanied by changes in the brain monoamines
 male Sprague‐Dawley rats were intubated intragastrically with 10% (w/v) ethanol solution 3 times daily (daily dose 8–11 g/kg) for 7–10 days.
Control rats were intubated with similar volumes of tap water.
The rats were killed 4–6 hrs (intoxicated group) or 16–18 hrs (withdrawal group) after the last administration of ethanol.
At this time the withdrawn rats showed a stiff tail, spastic rigidity, piloerection, tremor, hyperexcitability, stereotyped head movements as well as convulsions.
The dopamine and homovanillic acid concentrations as well as the disappearance rate of dopamine after synthesis blockade (α‐methyl‐<jats:italic>p</jats:italic>‐tyrosine 250 mg/kg intraperitoneally 3 hrs) were similar in the brain of control, ethanol intoxicated and withdrawn rats.
Chronic ethanol administration did not alter the concentration of noradrenaline in the brain or the heart of the rats.
However, the disappearance rate of noradrenaline after synthesis blockade was accelerated by about 30–50% in the brain and heart of rats withdrawn from ethanol.
Moreover, the concentration of noradrenaline was decreased by 40–60% in the brain and heart of rats which died in withdrawal convulsions.
The experiments suggest that the noradrenergic mechanisms but not the dopaminergic mechanisms may be associated with the occurrence of withdrawal symptoms.</jats:p>
The effect of misonidazole on some physiologic parameters in mice. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1980 Jan;212(1):47-52.

The effect of misonidazole on some physiologic parameters in mice.

Conroy PJ
 von Burg R, Passalacqua W, Sutherland RM.
The physiologic effects of misonidazole (Ro-07-0582) were studied in BALB/cKa 
mice injected i.p.
at 0.5 to 1.5 mg/g b.wt.
A 2--4 degree C reduction of body 
core temperature was observed in unanesthetized mice: the duration and degree of 
effect were dependent on dose.
Normal core temperatures were restored when the 
serum level of misonidazole had fallen to 0.5 microM (100 micrograms/ml).
Misonidazole (1 mg/g) produced a rapid postinjectional drop of heart rate (40%), 
respiration (45%) and body core (4 degrees C) temperatures which gradually 
returned to preinjection values 6 to 8 hr later.
In addition, misonidazole 
administration (1 mg/g) enhanced the overall effect on body temperature induced 
by hexobarbital anesthesia by a factor of approximately 3.
These results are 
discussed in relation to the use of mouse model tumor systems to give an 
estimate of the magnitude of the cytotoxic effect of misonidazole expected in 
humans.
PMID: 7351625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
["Bis-netropsin" as a selective inhibitor of DNA-dependent RNA synthesis]. 1. Dokl Akad Nauk SSSR. 1981;259(1):244-7.

["Bis-netropsin" as a selective inhibitor of DNA-dependent RNA synthesis].

[Article in Russian]

Rechinskiĭ VO
 Bibilashvili RSh, Khorlin AA, Grokhovskiĭ SL, Zhuze AL.
PMID: 6169496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adaptive down-regulation of the serotonin transporter in the 6-hydroxydopamine-induced rat model of preclinical stages of Parkinson’s disease and after chronic pramipexole treatment 1. Neuroscience. 2016 Feb 9;314:22-34. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.11.049. 
Epub 2015 Nov 26.

Adaptive down-regulation of the serotonin transporter in the 
6-hydroxydopamine-induced rat model of preclinical stages of Parkinson's disease 
and after chronic pramipexole treatment.

Berghauzen-Maciejewska K(1)
 Wardas J(1), Kosmowska B(1), Domin H(2), Śmiałowska 
M(2), Głowacka U(1), Ossowska K(3).
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuro-Psychopharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish 
Academy of Sciences, 12 Smętna Street, 31-343 Kraków, Poland.
(2)Department of Neurobiology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish Academy of 
Sciences, 12 Smętna Street, 31-343 Kraków, Poland.
(3)Department of Neuro-Psychopharmacology, Institute of Pharmacology, Polish 
Academy of Sciences, 12 Smętna Street, 31-343 Kraków, Poland.
Electronic 
address: ossowska@if-pan.krakow.pl.
Our recent study has indicated that a moderate lesion induced by bilateral 
6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) injections into the ventrolateral region of the 
caudate-putamen (CP) in rats, modeling preclinical stages of Parkinson's 
disease, induces a "depressive-like" behavior which is reversed by chronic 
treatment with pramipexole (PRA).
The aim of the present study was to examine 
the influence of the above lesion and chronic PRA treatment on binding to the 
serotonin transporter (SERT) in different brain regions.
As before, 6-OHDA (15 
μg/2.5 μl) was administered bilaterally into the CP.
PRA (1mg/kg) was injected 
subcutaneously twice a day for 2 weeks.
Serotonergic and dopaminergic neurons of 
the dorsal raphe (DR) were immunostained for tryptophan hydroxylase and tyrosine 
hydroxylase, respectively, and were counted stereologically.
Binding of 
[(3)H]GBR 12,935 to the dopamine transporter (DAT) and [(3)H]citalopram to SERT 
was analyzed autoradiographically.
Intrastriatal 6-OHDA injections decreased the 
number of dopaminergic, but not serotonergic neurons in the DR. 6-OHDA reduced 
the DAT binding in the CP, and SERT binding in the nigrostriatal system (CP, 
substantia nigra (SN)), limbic system (ventral tegmental area (VTA), nucleus 
accumbens (NAC), amygdala, prefrontal cortex (PFCX), habenula, hippocampus) and 
DR. A significant positive correlation was found between DAT and SERT binding in 
the CP.
Chronic PRA did not influence DAT binding but reduced SERT binding in 
the above structures, and deepened the lesion-induced losses in the core region 
of the NAC, SN, VTA and PFCX.
The present study indicates that both the lesion 
of dopaminergic neurons and chronic PRA administration induce adaptive 
down-regulation of SERT binding.
Moreover, although involvement of stimulation 
of dopaminergic transmission by chronic PRA in its "antidepressant" effect seems 
to be prevalent, additional contribution of SERT inhibition cannot be excluded.
Copyright © 2015 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2015.11.049
PMID: 26628402 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Influence of Ovarian Hormones on Cortical Spreading Depression and Its Suppression by L-kynurenine in Rat 1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 10;8(12):e82279. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082279. 
eCollection 2013.

Influence of ovarian hormones on cortical spreading depression and its 
suppression by L-kynurenine in rat.

Chauvel V(1)
 Schoenen J, Multon S.

Author information:
(1)Cephalic Pain Unit of GIGA-Neurosciences, Liège University, Liège, Belgium.
Migraine is sexually dimorphic and associated in 20-30% of patients with an aura 
most likely caused by cortical spreading depression (CSD).
We have previously 
shown that systemic L-kynurenine (L-KYN), the precursor of kynurenic acid, 
suppresses CSD and that this effect depends on the stage of the estrous cycle in 
female rats.
The objectives here are to determine the influence of ovarian 
hormones on KCl-induced CSD and its suppression after L-KYN by directly 
modulating estradiol or progesterone levels in ovariectomized rats.
Adult female 
rats were ovariectomized and subcutaneously implanted with silastic capsules 
filled with progesterone or 17β-estradiol mixed with cholesterol, with 
cholesterol only or left empty.
Two weeks after the ovariectomy/capsule 
implantation, the animals received an i.p.
injection of L-KYN (300 mg/kg) or 
NaCl as control.
Thirty minutes later CSDs were elicited by applying KCl over 
the occipital cortex and recorded by DC electrocorticogram for 1 hour.
The 
results show that both estradiol and progesterone increase CSD frequency after 
ovariectomy.
The suppressive effect of L-KYN on CSD frequency, previously 
reported in normal cycling females, is not found anymore after ovariectomy, but 
reappears after progesterone replacement therapy.
Taken together, these results 
emphasize the complex role of sex hormones on cortical excitability.
The CSD 
increase by estradiol and, more surprisingly, progesterone may explain why 
clinically migraine with aura appears or worsens during pregnancy or with 
combined hormonal treatments.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0082279
PMCID: PMC3858280
PMID: 24340013 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Choosy Males Could Help Explain Androdioecy in a Selfing Fish 1. Am Nat. 2013 Jun;181(6):855-62. doi: 10.1086/670304. Epub 2013 May 1.

Choosy males could help explain androdioecy in a selfing fish.

Ellison A(1)
 Jones J, Inchley C, Consuegra S.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Biological, Environmental and Rural Sciences (IBERS), 
Aberystwyth University, Penglais Campus, Aberystwyth SY23 3DA, United Kingdom.
Androdioecy (the coexistence of males and hermaphrodites) is considered a 
transitional state derived from pure hermaphroditism or dioecy, but the 
processes selecting for this rare breeding system are unclear, particularly in 
animals.
In androdioecious species, the proportion of males in relation to 
hermaphrodites is usually so reduced that it is not known whether there is scope 
for mate choice, particularly when simultaneous hermaphrodites can 
self-fertilize.
We investigated the potential role of male mate choice in the 
persistence of androdioecy in animals using a self-fertilizing androdioecious 
fish (Kryptolebias marmoratus) as a model.
Hermaphrodites preferred to associate 
with males but showed no preference based on genetic similarity.
In contrast, 
males displayed a strong preference for genetically dissimilar hermaphrodites, 
based, apparently, on olfactory cues.
We suggest that disassortative male mate 
choice could be a critical factor in stabilizing androdioecy in cases where high 
selfing rates are associated with inbreeding depression.
DOI: 10.1086/670304
PMID: 23669547 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Investigation of Nutritional Disorders 1. Vet Clin North Am Food Anim Pract. 1988 Mar;4(1):127-44. doi: 
10.1016/s0749-0720(15)31104-x.

The investigation of nutritional disorders.

Swecker WS(1)
 Thatcher CD.
Author information:
(1)Virginia-Maryland Regional College of Veterinary Medicine, Virginia 
Polytechnic Institute and State University, Blacksburg.
The following list is presented as a summary of guidelines that may be helpful 
in the investigation of a nutritional disorder.
1.
Identify the perceived herd 
or flock problem.
The client's complaint usually reflects an appearance of 
clinical signs or a depression in production parameters.
The practitioner should 
also identify subclinical manifestations and other concurrent problems.
2.
Identify the affected population or subpopulation.
Groups should be identified 
according to breed, sex, age, reproductive status, growth phase, and lactation 
status.
It is critical to identify the affected population, as a diet can be 
adequate for one population and deficient or excessive for another.
For example, 
24-month-old Angus heifers in the first 60 days of lactation would have greater 
risk of protein-energy malnutrition than would 5-year-old Angus cows in their 
second trimester of gestation if both were fed a marginal hay ration.
3.
Identify the nutritional requirements for the affected population.
The National 
Research Council publications serve as a guideline in determining nutrient 
requirements.
4.
Identify factors that influence nutrient requirements and feed 
intake.
Environmental factors, such as ambient temperature, can affect both 
nutrient requirements and feed intake of the population.
Housing conditions, 
such as muddy lots, can increase maintenance requirements.
5.
Sample and 
evaluate the feedstuffs.
Nutrient(s) must be bioavailable--that is, they must be 
in a form that can be ingested, digested, and absorbed by the animal.
6.
Sample 
and evaluate water sources for quantity and quality.
7.
Evaluate feed bunk 
management practices.
8.
Examine the herd.
Both affected and normal populations 
should be examined.
9.
Evaluate and submit to a laboratory any animal samples 
that may relate to the disorder.
10.
Assemble the data and develop a hypothesis 
to support a diagnosis.
11.
Provide a written account of all recommendations for 
the producer.
DOI: 10.1016/s0749-0720(15)31104-x
PMID: 3259454 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression of Hydrogen Peroxide Dependent Killing of Schistosomula in Vitro by Peritoneal Exudate Cells from Schistosoma Mansoni Infected Mice 1. Am J Trop Med Hyg. 1989 Feb;40(2):186-94. doi: 10.4269/ajtmh.1989.40.186.

Depression of hydrogen peroxide dependent killing of schistosomula in vitro by 
peritoneal exudate cells from Schistosoma mansoni infected mice.

Smith JM(1)
 Mkoji GM, Prichard RK.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Parasitology, McGill University, Ste Anne de Bellevue, Quebec, 
Canada.
Peritoneal exudate cells from mice infected with Schistosoma mansoni (S-PEC) can 
kill a small proportion of schistosomula in vitro in the presence of immune 
serum.
S-PEC produce a low level of respiratory burst.
However, schistosomula 
mortality in their presence is not reduced when exogenous antioxidants are 
added, suggesting that with S-PEC, oxidative killing may not be important.
Hydrogen peroxide (H2O2) and superoxide production by S-PEC, and cells from 
Bacillus Calmette-Guerin (BCG) and thioglycollate (THGL) injected mice, 
nonspecifically stimulated with opsonized zymosan, were measured.
Levels of H2O2 
produced by S-PEC were significantly lower than BCG or THGL PEC, and were below 
the threshold for schistosomula killing.
This correlated with lower levels of 
cell-mediated killing of schistosomula in vitro by S-PEC than by BCG-PEC.
Superoxide levels, however, were similar between the 3 cell populations.
It 
therefore appears that the efficiency of PEC to kill schistosomules in vitro 
correlates with H2O2 rather than superoxide levels.
It was found that there was 
a sharp concentration threshold in H2O2 mediated killing of schistosomula.
A 
depression in the levels of H2O2 produced may be a mechanism by which the 
parasite can partially evade the host immune system.
DOI: 10.4269/ajtmh.1989.40.186
PMID: 2537585 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Brain extracellular space during spreading depression and ischemia <jats:p>The change of extracellular space volume of rat brain cortex during ischemia and cortical spreading depression
 CSD (Leāo4) was evaluated by a new method.
The cortical surface was imgated with isotonic CSF containing the extracellular markers 50 mM cholin or 50 mM trimethyltris(hydroxymethyl)methyl ammonium ion (N‐TRIS), and their extracellular concentrations were monitored by ion‐selective microelectrodes.
When steady‐state for the concentration of these markers was attained, CSD evoked a reversible increase of the concentration of the markers, indicating shrinkage of the interstitial volume of distribution.
During ischemia an initial slow rate of concentration increase was observed, followed a few minutes later by a rapid increase concomitant with the sharp rise in extracellular potassium concentration.
During CSD and ischemia, the maximal increases of choline and N‐TRIS concentration reflected a shrinkage of the extracellular space amounting to about 50% of the initial volume.</jats:p>
[Effect of stimulation of GABA-ergic structures of the substantia nigra and caudate nucleus on food-getting behavior in the cat]. 1. Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlova. 1983 May-Jun;33(3):486-92.

[Effect of stimulation of GABA-ergic structures of the substantia nigra and 
caudate nucleus on food-getting behavior in the cat].

[Article in Russian]

Shugalev NP.

A study was made of the functional significance of GABA-ergic structures of the 
substantia nigra (SN) and the caudate nucleus (CN) and their role in 
food-procuring behaviour of cats. Analysis was made of behavioral and 
EEG-effects of local GABA and the GABA antagonist
 picrotoxin, microinjections 
into the studied brain structures.
Stimulation of the GABA-ergic structures of 
the SN produced a sedative effect and depression of the cat food-procuring 
behaviour.
Effects of stimulation of the CN GABA-ergic structures were to a 
great degree reverse.
The conclusion has been made that GABA-ergic structures of 
the SN and the CN play different roles in controlling the CN inhibitory 
influence upon food-procuring behaviour.
PMID: 6613342 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
PHARMACOKINETICS OF FENTANYL AS A POSSIBLE EXPLANATION FOR RECURRENCE OF RESPIRATORY DEPRESSION 1. Br J Anaesth. 1979 Aug;51(8):741-5. doi: 10.1093/bja/51.8.741.

Pharmacokinetics of fentanyl as a possible explanation for recurrence of 
respiratory depression.

Stoeckel H
 Hengstmann JH, Schüttler J.
The pharmacokinetics of fentanyl are complicated by an additional increase in 
plasma concentration during the elimination phase of the drug.
We have confirmed 
that fentanyl is excreted in the gastric juice and reabsorbed from the alkaline 
medium of the small intestine.
In addition, the stomach wall in rats has an 
important storage capacity for fentanyl.
A maximum of about 20% of the dose was 
found in the stomach wall after i.v.
injection.
In man the resected part of the 
stomach contained 16% of the dose, 10 min after injection.
These observations 
could be important in explaining the occurrence of respiratory depression in the 
period after operation.
DOI: 10.1093/bja/51.8.741
PMID: 497071 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Modification by Ca ++ removal
 Mg ++ and Sr ++ of the membrane effect and the inotropic effect of norepinephrine in rabbit left atria.
1.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther.
1972 Mar;180(3):698-709.
Modification by Ca ++ removal, Mg ++ and Sr ++ of the membrane effect and the 
inotropic effect of norepinephrine in rabbit left atria.
Toda N.

PMID: 5012788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Activity-dependent potentiation and depression of visual cortical responses to optic nerve stimulation in kittens <jats:p> 1. To see whether long-lasting changes in synaptic efficacy are induced in the developing visual cortex (VC)
 field potentials evoked by test stimulation given alternatively to each of the optic nerves (ONs) were recorded from VC of kittens ranging in age from 4 to 8 wk.
In some experiments, field potentials were recorded simultaneously from the dorsal lateral geniculate nucleus (LGN) in addition to VC.
2.
Tetanic stimulation was applied to one of the ONs for 1-60 min at 5 Hz.
Homosynaptic potentiation of cortical responses, defined as an increase lasting &gt; 2.5 h in the cortical field potential evoked by test stimulation of the ON that was tetanized, was induced without any changes in LGN responses in 3 of the 12 kittens tested.
Heterosynaptic depression, defined as a decrease lasting &gt; 0.5 h in the field potential evoked by stimulation of the ON that was not tetanized, was also induced in two of those three kittens.
3.
To elucidate a role of inputs originating from spontaneous activity of retinal ganglion cells in induction of potentiation and depression in the cortex, tetrodotoxin (TTX) was injected into both eyes of 11 kittens.
After we confirmed the suppression of retinal activity by TTX, tetanic stimulation was applied to ON.
Homosynaptic potentiation of cortical responses was induced in 6 of the 11 kittens, and the ratio of the mean amplitude of posttetanic responses to that of pretetanic responses for the 11 kittens was on average larger than that for the 12 control kittens.
Heterosynaptic depression was not observed in any of the 11 kittens.
4.
To see a role of postsynaptic activity in induction of potentiation and depression, gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) was applied continuously to the VC by an infusion pump in 10 kittens.
Tetanic stimulation was given to ON while cortical activities were suppressed by GABA.
After recovery of cortical activities, homosynaptic depression was found to be induced in 3 of the 10 kittens, but homosynaptic potentiation was not observed at all.
The ratio of amplitude of posttetanic to pretetanic responses at the tetanized side for the 10 kittens was on average smaller than that for the 11 TTX-injected kittens.
5.
These results can be accounted for by the modified covariance model in which the relation of postsynaptic activity and direction of changes in synaptic efficacy is formulated.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS) </jats:p>
The role of 5-HT1A and 5-HT1B/1D receptors on the modulation of acute fluoxetine-induced changes in extracellular 5-HT: the mechanism of action of (±)pindolol 1. Neuropharmacology. 2000 Apr 3;39(6):1044-52. doi:
10.1016/s0028-3908(99)00192-6.

The role of 5-HT(1A) and 5-HT(1B/1D) receptors on the modulation of acute 
fluoxetine-induced changes in extracellular 5-HT: the mechanism of action of 
(+/-)pindolol.

Dawson LA(1)
 Nguyen HQ.
Author information:
(1)CNS Disorders Division, Wyeth-Ayerst Research, Princeton, NJ 08543-8000, USA.
dawson1@war.wyeth.com

Some clinical evidence has suggested that (+/-)pindolol can be effective at 
producing a shortened time to onset of antidepressant activity when 
co-administered with a serotonin specific reuptake inhibitor (SSRI).
This effect 
has been attributed to the antagonist effects of pindolol at the 5-HT(1A) 
receptor.
In the present study, we compared the pharmacology of (+/-)pindolol, 
WAY-100635 (a 5-HT(1A) antagonist), GR127935 (a 5-HT(1B/1D) antagonist), and 
isamoltane (a 5-HT(1B) antagonist), when given acutely in combination with 
fluoxetine, using in vivo microdialysis in the frontal cortex of the freely 
moving rat.
We have determined that the acute fluoxetine-induced increases in 
extracellular 5-HT can be augmented by (+/-)pindolol, WAY100635, GR127935 and 
isamoltane with maximum increases of 216+/-32%, 235+/-49%, 240+/-18% and 
171+/-47% of preinjection control levels, respectively.
Combination of both 
5-HT(1A) and 5-HT(1B/1D) autoreceptor antagonists with fluoxetine produced 
additive increases in extracellular 5-HT (i.e.
WAY100635+GR127935+fluoxetine and 
WAY100635+isamoltane+fluoxetine produced a four- and five-fold potentiation, 
respectively), suggesting that this strategy may be useful in further augmenting 
the action of a SSRI in the treatment of depression.
In addition, by comparing 
the combined administration of (+/-)pindolol with either WAY100635, GR127935 or 
isamoltane, we have determined that (+/-)pindolol produces much of its acute 
potentiation of fluoxetine-induced increases in extracellular 5-HT via its 
action at the 5-HT(1B/D) receptor in addition to any activity it has at the 
presynaptic 5-HT(1A) receptor.
DOI: 10.1016/s0028-3908(99)00192-6
PMID: 10727715 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hydrocortisone requirement for the induction of glutamine synthetase in chick-embryo retinas <jats:p>Hydrocortisone has been found to induce glutamine synthetase activity in chick-embryo retinas in culture. Evidence is presented to show that the hydrocortisone is definitely required for transcription; its requirement for translation has not been ruled out. The possible identity of hydrocortisone with an active component of calf-serum diffusate reported earlier is discussed. The data also indicate that the glutamine synthetase messenger RNA is stable for at least several hours.</jats:p>
[Combined effect of cardiac glycosides and diuretics of some functions of heart]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1969 Nov-Dec;32(6):690-2.

[Combined effect of cardiac glycosides and diuretics of some functions of 
heart].

[Article in Russian]

Zhukova VA.

PMID: 5381599 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of lofepramine and other related agents on the motility of Tetrahymena pyriformis 1. Toxicol Lett. 2002 Mar 10;128(1-3):207-14. doi: 10.1016/s0378-4274(01)00542-2.

The effect of lofepramine and other related agents on the motility of 
Tetrahymena pyriformis.

Darcy P(1)
 Kelly JP, Leonard BE, Henry JA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National University of Ireland, Galway, Ireland.
pipdarcy@hotmail.com

Tricyclic antidepressants (TCAs) were introduced almost 50 years ago.
Whilst 
there is no doubt that TCAs are effective in treating depression, they are also 
more cardiotoxic when taken in overdose than other antidepressant groups.
Lofepramine is a more recently introduced modified TCA, which in animals and man 
has low toxicity when compared to older TCAs.
Paradoxically, lofepramine is 
extensively metabolised to desipramine, which has considerable toxicity, both 
experimentally and in overdose.
The toxicity of such compounds is attributed, in 
part, to a membrane stabilising effect (MSA) on cell membranes.
This MSA causes 
gross effects to the cell structure and in turn, normal cell activity.
The aim 
of this study was to compare the MSA of lofepramine with that of desipramine and 
amitriptyline in order to see if this might help to explain the low toxicity of 
lofepramine.
The local anaesthetic agent lignocaine was also studied for 
comparison.
Each compound was enclosed in a beta-cyclodextrin to increase its 
solubility in aqueous medium.
The extent of MSA was determined as a measure of 
the effect on the swimming speed of the protozoan Tetrahymena pyriformis using a 
video image analysis system.
The IC50s for the various drugs were then 
correlated with their respective octanol-water partition coefficient values 
(Pow).
Amitriptyline had an IC50 of 1.26+/-0.29 mM, desipramine 75.99+/-14.40 
mM, while lofepramine had an IC50 of 357.40+/-25.00 mM.
Lignocaine had an IC50 
of 85.73+/-18.30 mM.
There was also a significant correlation between the IC50 
values and the Pow values.
DOI: 10.1016/s0378-4274(01)00542-2
PMID: 11869831 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cardiovascular effects of 2-Br-alpha-ergocriptine in urethane anesthetized rats. 1. Acta Physiol Lat Am. 1982;32(2):117-22.

Cardiovascular effects of 2-Br-alpha-ergocriptine in urethane anesthetized rats.

Pesce G
 Stefano FJ.
Experiments were designed to study the cardiovascular effects of Bromocriptine 
(2-Br-alpha-ergocriptine) in the normotensive anesthetized rats.
The intravenous 
administration of bromocriptine (20 micrograms/kg and 200 micrograms/kg) 
produced a long-lasting and not dose-dependent fall in the mean blood pressure 
and heart rate.
The pressor response to phenylephrine, an alpha adrenergic 
agonist, was antagonized by bromocriptine in a dose-dependent manner.
At a dose 
of 20 micrograms/kg bromocriptine behaved as a competitive antagonist, whereas 
at the dose of 200 micrograms/kg produced an insurmountable blockade of the 
response to phenylephrine.
Previous administration of phentolamine (5 mg/kg) 
prevented the insurmountable blockade of alpha adrenoceptors by bromocriptine.
This observation suggests that both drugs compete for the same receptor.
It is 
concluded that blockade of peripheral alpha-adrenoceptors may contribute to 
cardiovascular effects of bromocriptine.
PMID: 7170990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Experimental studies on the chronic toxic effects of vinyl chloride in rats. 1. J Hyg Epidemiol Microbiol Immunol. 1980;24(3):285-94.

Experimental studies on the chronic toxic effects of vinyl chloride in rats.

Sokal JA
 Barański B, Majka J, Rolecki R, Stetkiewicz J, Ivanova-Chemishanska L, 
Vergieva T, Antonov G, Mirkova E, Kolakowski J, Szendzikowski S, Wróblewska K.

Male rats were exposed to vinyl chloride at the concentrations of 50, 500, and 
20 000 ppm, 5 hours daily, 5 days a week for 10 months.
Morphological lesions in 
the liver and the testes detected by light and electron microscope and 
depression in body weight increase intensified with the duration of exposure.
Increased relative weights of some organs and slight hematological and 
biochemical changes in blood during the course of the experiment were also 
observed.
Some toxic effects including morphological liver injuries arose at the 
smallest exposure level, i. e., 50 ppm.
Assuming 50 ppm as the threshold 
concentration for rats, the 5 ppm level has been estimated as the safe exposure 
limit in industry in relation to systemic effects of vinyl chloride.
PMID: 6449527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Naproxen attenuates sensitization of depressive-like behavior and fever during maternal separation 1. Physiol Behav. 2015 Feb;139:34-40. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.11.030. Epub
2014  Nov 14.

Naproxen attenuates sensitization of depressive-like behavior and fever during 
maternal separation.

Hennessy MB(1)
 Stafford NP(2), Yusko-Osborne B(2), Schiml PA(2), Xanthos ED(2), 
Deak T(3).
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA.
Electronic address: michael.hennessy@wright.edu.
(2)Department of Psychology, Wright State University, Dayton, OH 45435, USA.
(3)Behavioral Neuroscience Program, Department of Psychology, Binghamton 
University, Binghamton, NY 13902, USA.
Early life stress can increase susceptibility for later development of 
depressive illness though a process thought to involve inflammatory mediators.
Isolated guinea pig pups exhibit a passive, depressive-like behavioral response 
and fever that appear mediated by proinflammatory activity, and which sensitize 
with repeated separations.
Treatment with an anti-inflammatory can attenuate the 
behavioral response during the initial separation and separation the following 
day.
Here we used the cyclooxygenase inhibitor naproxen to examine the role of 
prostaglandins in mediating the depressive-like behavior and core body 
temperature of young guinea pigs during an initial separation, separation the 
next day, and separation 10 days after the first.
The passive, depressive-like 
behavior as well as fever sensitized with repeated separation.
Three days of 
injection with 14 mg/kg of naproxen prior to the initial separation reduced 
depressive-like behavior during all three separations.
A 28 mg/kg dose of 
naproxen, however, had minimal effect on behavior.
Fever during the early 
separations was moderated by naproxen, but only at the higher dose.
These 
results suggest a role of prostaglandins in the behavioral and febrile response 
to maternal separation, and particularly in the sensitization of depressive-like 
behavior following repeated separation.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2014.11.030
PMCID: PMC4275325
PMID: 25449392 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long-Term Depression at Parallel Fiber to Golgi Cell Synapses <jats:p> Golgi cells (GoCs) are the primary inhibitory interneurons of the granular layer of the cerebellum. Their inhibition of granule cells is central to operate the relay of excitatory inputs to the cerebellar cortex. Parallel fibers (PFs) establish synapses to the GoCs in the molecular layer; these synapses contain AMPA
 N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA), and mostly group II metabotropic glutamate receptors.
Long-term changes in the efficacy of synaptic transmission at the PF-GoC synapse have not been described previously.
We used whole cell patch-clamp recordings of GoCs in acute rat cerebellar slices to study synaptic plasticity.
We report that high-frequency burst stimulation of PFs, using a current-clamp or voltage-clamp induction protocol, gave rise to long-term depression (LTD) at the PF-GoC synapse.
This form of LTD was not associated with persistent changes of paired-pulse ratio, suggesting a postsynaptic origin.
Furthermore, LTD induction was not dependent on activation of NMDA receptors.
PF-GoC LTD does require activation of specifically group II metabotropic glutamate receptors and of protein kinase A.
</jats:p>
Pharmacological characterization of a novel investigational antimuscarinic drug
 fesoterodine, <i>in vitro</i> and <i>in vivo</i> <jats:sec><jats:title>OBJECTIVE</jats:title><jats:p>To investigate the primary pharmacology of fesoterodine (a novel antimuscarinic drug developed for treating overactive bladder) and SPM 7605 (its active metabolite, considered to be the main pharmacologically active principle of fesoterodine in man) against human muscarinic receptor subtypes, and to investigate <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> and <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> functional activity of these agents on the rat bladder compared with existing standard agents.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>MATERIALS AND METHODS</jats:title><jats:p>The displacement of radioligand binding by fesoterodine, SPM 7605 and standard agents in membrane preparations of Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells expressing the different human muscarinic receptors (M1–M5) was characterized.
Agonistic and antagonistic activities were studied using different CHO cell lines stably expressing the human recombinant muscarinic receptor subtypes.
The effects of fesoterodine and SPM 7605 on isolated bladder strips contracted by carbachol or electrical field stimulation (EFS) were investigated.
<jats:italic>In vivo</jats:italic> the effects of fesoterodine and SPM 7605 on micturition variables were assessed using continuous cystometry in conscious female Sprague‐Dawley rats, and compared to those of oxybutynin and atropine.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>RESULTS</jats:title><jats:p> <jats:italic>In vitro</jats:italic> SPM 7605 potently inhibited radioligand binding at all five human muscarinic receptor subtypes with equal affinity across all five.
Fesoterodine had a similar balanced selectivity profile but was less potent than SPM 7605.
Both substances were competitive antagonists of cholinergic agonist‐stimulated responses in human M1‐M5 cell lines and had a similar potency and selectivity profile to the radioligand‐binding studies.
In rat bladder strips, fesoterodine and SPM 7605 caused a rightward shift of the concentration‐response curve for carbachol with no depression of the maximum, and concentration‐dependently reduced contractions induced by EFS.
The potency of both drugs was similar to that of atropine and oxybutynin.
In the presence of the esterase inhibitor neostigmine, the concentration‐response curve of fesoterodine was shifted to the right, suggesting that part of the activity was caused by metabolism to SPM 7605 by tissue enzymes.
<jats:italic>In vivo,</jats:italic> low doses (0.01 mg/kg) of fesoterodine and SPM 7605 reduced micturition pressure and increased intercontraction intervals and bladder capacity, but did not affect residual volume.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>CONCLUSIONS</jats:title><jats:p>Fesoterodine and its active metabolite, SPM 7605, are nonsubtype selective, competitive antagonists of human muscarinic receptors, but SPM 7605 has greater potency than the parent compound.
Pharmacodynamic studies in the rat bladder <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> confirm the competitive muscarinic antagonist profile of these agents in a native tissue preparation, and <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> studies in the rat showed effects on bladder function consistent with a muscarinic antagonist profile.</jats:p></jats:sec>
[Effect of temperature and agents on Ca-uptake of the fragmented sarcoplasmic reticulum]. 1. Nihon Seirigaku Zasshi. 1972;34(1):28-39.

[Effect of temperature and agents on Ca-uptake of the fragmented sarcoplasmic 
reticulum].

[Article in Japanese]

Nishijima H
 Yonemoto K, Sakai T.

PMID: 4260671 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In vivo genotoxic evaluation of the furylethylene derivative 1-(5-bromofur-2-yl)-2-nitroethene in mouse bone marrow 1. Environ Toxicol Pharmacol. 2005 Jul;20(1):241-5. doi: 
10.1016/j.etap.2005.02.003. Epub 2005 Mar 16.

In vivo genotoxic evaluation of the furylethylene derivative 
1-(5-bromofur-2-yl)-2-nitroethene in mouse bone marrow.

Borroto JI(1)
 Creus A, Marcos R, Zapatero J.
Author information:
(1)Grup de Mutagènesi, Departament de Genètica i de Microbiologia, Facultat de 
Ciències, Universitat Autònoma de Barcelona, 08193 Bellaterra, Cerdanyola del 
Vallès, Spain; Centro de Investigación y Desarrollo Aplicado, Cida s.a.l., 08130 
Santa Perpètua de Mogoda, Barcelona, Spain.
The genotoxic potential of the compound 1-(5-bromofur-2-yl)-2-nitroethene 
(2-βNF) has been tested by using the in vivo mouse bone marrow micronucleus 
assay.
Its ability to induce clastogenicity or aneugenicity, through the 
induction of micronucleated polychromatic erythrocytes (MNPCE) in the bone 
marrow cells has been evaluated.
Treatment groups of five CD-1 male mice were 
administered once intraperitoneally at the doses of 10, 20, and 30mg/kg, and 
their bone marrows were sampled at 24 and 48h after the administration, at the 
first sampling time animals administered with the three doses were used, and in 
the second sampling time, only animals administered with the highest dose were 
used.
All animals treated with the highest dose of the test compound (30mg/kg) 
showed evident clinical symptoms of toxicity such as irritation, hunched 
posture, slight ataxia, dyspnoea, piloerection, and palpebral ptosis.
However, 
no marked depression of bone marrow cell proliferation was observed, and no 
significant increases in the frequency of MNPCE were obtained in any of the 
concentrations tested at any sampling times.
The positive control 
treated-animals were administered with cyclophosphamide at the dose of 40mg/mL.
The compound caused a significant increase in the number of MNPCE in all treated 
animals, demonstrating the sensitivity of the mouse strain used.
From the 
results obtained, it is concluded that the compound 2-βNF is neither clastogenic 
nor aneugenic in the erythrocytes from the bone marrow of treated mice at the 
doses tested.
DOI: 10.1016/j.etap.2005.02.003
PMID: 21783595
Excess Manganese Ingestion in the Chick 1. Poult Sci. 1983 Apr;62(4):642-6. doi: 10.3382/ps.0620642.

Excess manganese ingestion in the chick.

Southern LL
 Baker DH.
Two experiments were conducted with young chicks to investigate effects of 
excess manganese, (Mn) ingestion and to compare MnCl2 .
4H2O, MnSO4 .
H2O, MnO2, 
and MnCO3 as sources of dietary Mn activity.
Each source of Mn was added to a 
conventional corn-soybean meal diet to supply 3000, 4000, or 5000 mg/kg Mn.
High 
levels of dietary Mn from MnSO4 .
H2O and MnCl2 .
4H2O depressed growth 
slightly; MnO2 and MnCO3 did not affect chick performance.
Manganese dioxide 
contained less Mn activity than MnCO3, MnSO4 .
H2O, or MnCl2 .
4H2O as assessed 
by relative depressions in hemoglobin and hematocrit and by relative increases 
in bile, liver, and bone Mn concentrations.
Neutralization of the chloride ion 
in MnCl2 .
4H2O with NaHCO3 did not ameliorate the adverse effects of excess, 
MnCl2 .
4H2O ingestion.
Bone and bile Mn concentrations reflected Mn intake 
better than liver Mn concentration or rate and efficiency of weight gain.
DOI: 10.3382/ps.0620642
PMID: 6866900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
New rules governing synaptic plasticity in core nucleus accumbens medium spiny neurons <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The nucleus accumbens is a forebrain region responsible for drug reward and goal‐directed behaviors. It has long been believed that drugs of abuse exert their addictive properties on behavior by altering the strength of synaptic communication over long periods of time. To date
 attempts at understanding the relationship between drugs of abuse and synaptic plasticity have relied on the high‐frequency long‐term potentiation model of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T.V.
B</jats:styled-content>liss &amp; <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">T</jats:styled-content>.
<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">L</jats:styled-content>ømo [(1973) <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">J</jats:styled-content>ournal of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">P</jats:styled-content>hysiology, 232, 331–356].
We examined synaptic plasticity using spike‐timing‐dependent plasticity, a stimulation paradigm that reflects more closely the <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> firing patterns of mouse core nucleus accumbens medium spiny neurons and their afferents.
In contrast to other brain regions, the same stimulation paradigm evoked bidirectional long‐term plasticity.
The magnitude of spike‐timing‐dependent long‐term potentiation (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTP</jats:styled-content>) changed with the delay between action potentials and excitatory post‐synaptic potentials, and frequency, whereas that of spike‐timing‐dependent long‐term depression (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTD</jats:styled-content>) remained unchanged.
We showed that <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTP</jats:styled-content> depended on <jats:italic>N</jats:italic>‐methyl‐<jats:sc>d</jats:sc>‐aspartate receptors, whereas <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTD</jats:styled-content> relied on action potentials.
Importantly, the intracellular calcium signaling pathways mobilised during <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTP</jats:styled-content> and <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTD</jats:styled-content> were different.
Thus, calcium‐induced calcium release underlies <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTD</jats:styled-content> but not <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTP</jats:styled-content>.
Finally, we found that the firing pattern of a subset of medium spiny neurons was strongly inhibited by dopamine receptor agonists.
Surprisingly, these neurons were exclusively associated with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTP</jats:styled-content> but not with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">tLTD</jats:styled-content>.
Taken together, these data point to the existence of two subgroups of medium spiny neurons with distinct properties, each displaying unique abilities to undergo synaptic plasticity.</jats:p>
A mouse model of non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease: focus on pharmacological interventions targeting affective dysfunctions 1. Front Behav Neurosci. 2014 Aug 27;8:290. doi: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00290. 
eCollection 2014.

A mouse model of non-motor symptoms in Parkinson's disease: focus on 
pharmacological interventions targeting affective dysfunctions.

Bonito-Oliva A(1)
 Masini D(1), Fisone G(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, Karolinska Institutet Stockholm, Sweden.
Non-motor symptoms, including psychiatric disorders, are increasingly recognized 
as a major challenge in the treatment of Parkinson's disease (PD).
These 
ailments, which often appear in the early stage of the disease, affect a large 
number of patients and are only partly resolved by conventional antiparkinsonian 
medications, such as L-DOPA.
Here, we investigated non-motor symptoms of PD in a 
mouse model based on bilateral injection of the toxin 6-hydroxydopamine (6-OHDA) 
in the dorsal striatum.
This model presented only subtle gait modifications, 
which did not affect horizontal motor activity in the open-field test.
Bilateral 
6-OHDA lesion also impaired olfactory discrimination, in line with the anosmia 
typically observed in early stage parkinsonism.
The effect of 6-OHDA was then 
examined for mood-related dysfunctions.
Lesioned mice showed increased 
immobility in the forced swim test and tail suspension test, two behavioral 
paradigms of depression.
Moreover, the lesion exerted anxiogenic effects, as 
shown by reduced time spent in the open arms, in the elevated plus maze test, 
and by increased thigmotaxis in the open-field test.
L-DOPA did not modify 
depressive- and anxiety-like behaviors, which were instead counteracted by the 
dopamine D2/D3 receptor agonist, pramipexole.
Reboxetine, a noradrenaline 
reuptake inhibitor, was also able to revert the depressive and anxiogenic 
effects produced by the lesion with 6-OHDA.
Interestingly, pre-treatment with 
desipramine prior to injection of 6-OHDA, which is commonly used to preserve 
noradrenaline neurons, did not modify the effect of the lesion on depressive- 
and anxiety-like behaviors.
Thus, in the present model, mood-related conditions 
are independent of the reduction of noradrenaline caused by 6-OHDA.
Based on 
these findings we propose that the anti-depressive and anxiolytic action of 
reboxetine is mediated by promoting dopamine transmission through blockade of 
dopamine uptake from residual noradrenergic terminals.
DOI: 10.3389/fnbeh.2014.00290
PMCID: PMC4145811
PMID: 25221486
The effect of single and of multiple doses of prednisolone tertiary butyl acetate on cell population kinetics in the small bowel mucosa of the rat 1. Virchows Arch B Cell Pathol. 1978 Nov 6;28(4):339-50. doi: 10.1007/BF02889082.

The effect of single and of multiple doses of prednisolone tertiary butyl 
acetate on cell population kinetics in the small bowel mucosa of the rat.

Wright NA
 Al-Dewachi HS, Appleton DR, Watson AJ.
The effect of single and of multiple doses of prednisolone upon cell population 
kinetics in the rat jejunal crypt was investigated, using autoradiography and 
stathmokinetic techniques with vincristine.
Single injections of prednisolone 
(2.5 mg/kg body weight) induced a depression both flash thymidine labelling and 
mitotic indices; this change was shown to be due to a decreased cell production 
rate.
Recovery of these proliferative indices occurred over seven days after 
injection; measurement of crypt size parameters showed a transient decrease in 
crypt population.
Multiple daily injections of prednisolone (1 mg/kg body 
weight) produced a more sustained decrease in labelling and mitotic indices, 
which lasted as long as injections were continued (7 days); stathmokinetic 
techniques showed decreases in cell production rates, and the crypt population 
was also depressed throughout this period.
It is concluded that prednisolone 
depresses cell proliferative rates in rat jejunal mucosa.
DOI: 10.1007/BF02889082
PMID: 103298 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Involvement of melatonin and thyroid hormones in the control of sleep
 food intake and energy metabolism in the domestic fowl.
<jats:p>Growing male domestic fowl of an egg‐laying strain were fed ad libitum and injected intraperitoneally with melatonin or intramuscularly with triiodothyronine (T3) to study the effects on sleep, food intake, blood glucose, e.e.g., oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production.
Melatonin caused a dose‐related depression of food intake with sleep and aphagia lasting for 2 1/2 hr following 8 mg, drowsiness and greatly reduced intake following 4 and 2 mg and a slight reduction in food intake after 1 mg. T3 injection was followed by increased feeding within the range 50‐200 micrograms.
The higher dose (200 micrograms) completely prevented the effects of 10 mg melatonin injected simultaneously.
Melatonin (10 mg) depressed plasma glucose levels whereas T3 (200 micrograms) elevated blood glucose.
Either darkness or melatonin (10 mg) caused an increase in amplitude and a decrease in frequency of the e.e.g.
Birds fasted for 3 hr before injection showed significantly lower oxygen consumption and carbon dioxide production when given melatonin (10 mg); T3 had no effect within the 4 hr period after injection and did not modify the effects of melatonin.
It is postulated that the rapid effects of melatonin and T3 which were observed result from direct effects of these hormones on the central nervous system.</jats:p>
Competitive NMDA and Strychnine-Insensitive Glycine-Site Antagonists Disrupt Prepulse Inhibition 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1997 Aug;57(4):909-13. doi: 
10.1016/s0091-3057(96)00452-2.

Competitive NMDA and strychnine-insensitive glycine-site antagonists disrupt 
prepulse inhibition.

Furuya Y(1)
 Ogura H.

Author information:
(1)Eisai Tsukuba Research Laboratories, Ibaraki, Japan.
Prepulse inhibition (PPI) is thought to reflect the operation of a sensorimotor 
gating system in the brain.
Sensorimotor gating abnormalities have been 
identified in schizophrenic patients, and various neural systems are involved in 
this function.
To study the modulation of the sensorimotor gating system by the 
N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor channel complex, the effects of 
noncompetitive and competitive NMDA antagonists on PPI were examined in rats.
PPI was not disrupted by CGS 19755, a competitive NMDA antagonist, at 30 min 
after subcutaneous (s.c.) administration.
However, CGS 19755 (40 mg/kg s.c.) 
decreased PPI at 120 min after administration with a marked decrease of startle 
amplitude.
Late onset of the effect of CGS 19755 was also observed in the 
increase of spontaneous locomotor activity (SLA).
On the other hand, 
phencyclidine, a noncompetitive NMDA antagonist, disrupted PPI at 30 min after 
administration and increased SLA from 20 min after administration.
PPI was also 
disrupted by bilateral intracerebroventricular administration of 5,7-dichlorokyn 
urenate (10 and 20 micrograms/side X 2), an antagonist at the 
strychnine-insensitive glycine receptor, which is an allosteric binding site in 
the NMDA receptor-channel complex.
It is concluded that the NMDA 
receptor-channel complex plays an important role in regulation of PPI.
DOI: 10.1016/s0091-3057(96)00452-2
PMID: 9259023 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Disturbance of microsomal detoxication mechanisms in liver by chlorophenol pesticides 1. Chem Biol Interact. 1977 Jul;18(1):35-46. doi: 10.1016/0009-2797(77)90139-9.

Disturbance of microsomal detoxication mechanisms in liver by chlorophenol 
pesticides.

Arrhenius E
 Renberg L, Johansson L, Zetterqvist MA.
The pesticide pentachlorophenol known as an uncoupler of mitochondrial oxidative 
phosphorylation was shown to disturb liver microsomal detoxication functions by 
a selective inhibition of the terminal oxygenation enzyme P-450.
At lower 
concentrations the flavin moiety of this enzyme chain is not inhibited but 
rather is stimulated, whereby a qualitative shift in detoxication of aromatic 
amines from C-oxygenation to N-oxygenation is obtained.
The effects were due to 
the pentachlorophenol itself and not to a metabolite.
Similar effects of varying 
strength were also obtained with other chlorophenol pesticides; 2,4,di-, 
2,4,6,-tri and 2,3,4,6-tetrachlorophenol, di- and hexachlorophen, tri- and 
nonachloro-2-hydroxydiphenyl ethers.
The relevance of these findings to the 
possible synergistic influence of chlorophenols on the carcinogenic effects of 
polyaromatic amines and hydrocarbons is discussed.
DOI: 10.1016/0009-2797(77)90139-9
PMID: 890839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Thermoregulatory responses to the injection of monoamines
 acetylcholine and prostaglandins into a lateral cerebral ventricle of the echidna <jats:p>1.
The putative neurotransmitter substances 5‐hydroxytryptamine (5‐HT), noradrenaline (NA), acetylcholine (ACh) and prostaglandins E<jats:sub>1</jats:sub> (PGE<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>) and E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> (PGE<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>) have been injected into a lateral cerebral ventricle of the conscious echidna (<jats:italic>Tachyglossus aculeatus</jats:italic>); thermoregulatory responses in thermoneutral (ambient dry bulb temperature, <jats:italic>T</jats:italic><jats:sub>db</jats:sub>, of approximately 22° C), cool (<jats:italic>T</jats:italic><jats:sub>db</jats:sub> of approximately 14° C) and warm (<jats:italic>T</jats:italic><jats:sub>db</jats:sub> of approximately 26° C) environments were determined.</jats:p><jats:p>2.
Under all conditions, all of the drugs tested either caused deep body temperature to fall or else had no effect; the fall was brought about by peripheral vasodilatation and/or reduced metabolic rate due to a decrease in shivering or to general relaxation.</jats:p><jats:p>3.
Responses of the many placental mammals to 5‐HT, NA and ACh vary widely, and the echidna, a monotreme, appears to exhibit responses most like those of the rat.</jats:p><jats:p>4.
Placental mammals tested to date invariably exhibit a hyperthermic response to prostaglandins, and the hypothermic responses of this monotreme is therefore unique.
The present study included the confirmation of a hyperthermic response to PGE<jats:sub>1</jats:sub> and PGE<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> in cats and rats.</jats:p><jats:p>5.
It is concluded that the concept of thermoregulation by amines and other substances in the hypothalamus of placental mammals may also be applicable to the monotremes which have evolved separately from the marsupials and placental mammals for about 180 million years.</jats:p>
Oxiracetam prevents haloperidol-induced passive avoidance impairment in mice 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1992 Aug;42(4):797-801. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(92)90032-b.

Oxiracetam prevents haloperidol-induced passive avoidance impairment in mice.

Castellano C(1)
 Battaglia M, Sansone M.

Author information:
(1)Istituto di Psicobiologia e Psicofarmacologia, CNR, Roma, Italy.
The nootropic drug oxiracetam (50 mg/kg) prevented passive avoidance impairment 
induced by posttraining administration of haloperidol (0.25 and 0.5 mg/kg).
Conversely, oxiracetam did not antagonize either locomotor depression or 
suppression of active avoidance responses induced by the dopamine receptor 
blocking agent.
The results indicate that prevention of haloperidol-induced 
retention impairment, by oxiracetam, may be due to a not yet defined protective 
action, common to other nootropic agents, on different types of experimental 
amnesias, rather than to a specific interaction with dopaminergic mechanisms.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(92)90032-b
PMID: 1513861 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A new anti-inflammatory agent KL-1037 represses proinflammatory cytokine and inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene expression in activated microglia 1. Neuropharmacology. 2004 Aug;47(2):243-52. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2004.03.019.

A new anti-inflammatory agent KL-1037 represses proinflammatory cytokine and 
inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) gene expression in activated microglia.

Kim WK(1)
 Jang PG, Woo MS, Han IO, Piao HZ, Lee K, Lee H, Joh TH, Kim HS.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Ewha Institute of Neuroscience and Medical 
Research Center, Ewha Womans University School of Medicine, Seoul, South Korea.
Excessive proinflammatory cytokine and NO production by activated microglia play 
a role in neurodegenerative disorders.
In this study, we found that a new 
compound KL-1037 suppressed LPS-induced NO release/inducible nitric oxide 
synthase expression in BV2 mouse microglial cells.
In addition, KL-1037 
prominently diminished LPS-induced production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such 
as TNF-alpha, IL-1 beta and IL-6, while it increased anti-inflammatory IL-10 and 
TGF-beta 1 production.
By RNase protection assay and RT-PCR, we showed that 
KL-1037 regulated iNOS and cytokines at transcriptional or post-transcriptional 
level.
Further analysis of molecular mechanisms revealed that KL-1037 
prominently increased intracellular cAMP levels and potentiated LPS-induced 
pCREB expression.
However, LPS-induced MAP kinase or NF-kappa B activities were 
slightly or little changed by KL-1037.
Treatment with cAMP antagonist or IL-10 
neutralizing antibody completely reversed upregulation of IL-10 and partially 
repression of TNF-alpha or NO induced by KL-1037.
These data suggest that 
microglial inactivation by KL-1037 is at least in part due to activation of PKA 
pathway and/or upregulation of IL-10.
Thus, repressing proinflammatory cytokines 
and iNOS gene expression in activated microglia by KL-1037 may provide potential 
therapeutic strategies for various neurodegenerative diseases including ischemic 
cerebral disease.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2004.03.019
PMID: 15223303 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Prey-capture in <i>Pomacanthus semicirculatus</i> (Teleostei
Pomacanthidae): functional implications of intramandibular joints in marine angelfishes <jats:title>SUMMARY</jats:title>
               <jats:p>We examined prey-capture morphology and kinematics in the angelfish, Pomacanthus semicirculatus (Cuvier 1931), to evaluate the magnitude and role of functional specialisation.
The feeding apparatus of P. semicirculatus possess three biomechanical mechanisms of particular interest: (1) a novel intramandibular joint, permitting dentary rotation and protruded jaw closure; (2) an opercular linkage facilitating mandible depression; and (3) a suspensorial linkage with two novel points of flexion,permitting anterior rotation of the suspensorium and augmenting mandible protrusion.
Prey-capture kinematics were quantified using motion analysis of high-speed video, yielding performance profiles illustrating timing of onset,duration and magnitude of movement in these three biomechanical systems, and other variables traditionally quantified in studies of teleostean ram–suction feeding activity.
Mandible depression and suspensorial rotation both augmented mandible protrusion, and coincided during jaw protrusion, typically increasing head length by 30%.
Jaw closure appeared to result from contraction of the adductor mandibulae segment A2, which rotated the dentary by approximately 30° relative to the articular.
This resulted in jaw closure with the mandible fully depressed and the jaws at peak-protrusion.
Feeding events were concluded by a high-velocity jaw retraction (20–50 ms), and completed in 450–750 ms.
Feeding kinematics and morphology of Pomacanthus differed from other biting teleosts, and more closely resemble some long-jawed ram–suction feeders.
The structural and functional modifications in the Pomacanthusfeeding apparatus are matched to an unusual diet of structurally resilient and firmly attached benthic prey.</jats:p>
INVADING PARASITOIDS SUFFER NO ALLEE EFFECT: A MANIPULATIVE FIELD EXPERIMENT 1. Ecology. 2007 Sep;88(9):2392-403. doi: 10.1890/06-1238.1.

Invading parasitoids suffer no Allee effect: a manipulative field experiment.

Fauvergue X(1)
 Malausa JC, Giuge L, Courchamp F.

Author information:
(1)Institut National de la Recherche Agronomique (INRA), 400 Route des Chappes, 
06903 Sophia Antipolis Cedex, France.
xavier.fauvergue@sophia.inra.fr

One frequent explanation for the failure of biological invasions is the Allee 
effect: due to positive density dependence, initially small invading populations 
may fail to establish and spread.
Populations released for biological control 
are similar to fortuitous invading populations and may therefore suffer from 
Allee effects.
However, unlike fortuitous invasions, biological control allows 
the experimental manipulation of initial population size and, thus, offers a 
unique opportunity to test for the occurrence of Allee effects.
We manipulated 
the initial size of 45 populations of a parasitoid wasp introduced for the 
biological control of a phytophagous insect and followed the population dynamics 
of both parasitoids and hosts during three years.
Our results suggest an absence 
of Allee effects but clear negative density dependence instead: (1) the 
probability of establishment after three years was not affected by initial 
population size; (2) net reproductive rate was highest at low parasitoid density 
and high host density; (3) the sex ratio, reflecting the proportion of virgin 
females, did not increase at low density, suggesting that low densities did not 
impede mate-finding; (4) the depression of host populations did not depend upon 
the number of parasitoids introduced.
This is, to our knowledge, the first 
experimental test of the Allee effect in an invading parasitoid.
It leads us to 
propose that a number of behavioral and life-history features of many 
parasitoids could protect them from Allee effects.
DOI: 10.1890/06-1238.1
PMID: 17918416 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant-Like Effect of Different Estrogenic Compounds in the Forced Swimming Test 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2003 May;28(5):830-8. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300097.
Epub  2003 Mar 12.

Antidepressant-like effect of different estrogenic compounds in the forced 
swimming test.

Estrada-Camarena E(1)
 Fernández-Guasti A, López-Rubalcava C.

Author information:
(1)Depto de Farmacobiología CINVESTAV-IPN, Calzada de los Tenorios 235, Col 
Granjas Coapa, Deleg Tlalpan, CP 14330 México DF, México.
estrada@imp.edu.mx

The present study evaluated the possible antidepressant-like action of the 
natural estrogen 17beta-estradiol (E(2), 2.5-10 microg/rat), the synthetic 
steroidal estrogen ethinyl-estradiol (EE(2), 1.25-10.0 microg/rat), and the 
nonsteroidal synthetic estrogen, diethyl-stilbestrol (DES, 0.25-1.0 mg/rat) in 
ovariectomized adult female Wistar rats using the forced swimming test (FST).
The behavioral profile induced by the estrogens was compared with that induced 
by the antidepressants fluoxetine (FLX, 2.5-10 mg/kg) and desipramine (DMI, 
2.5-10 mg/kg).
In addition, the temporal course of the antidepressant-like 
action of the estrogenic compounds was analyzed.
FLX and DMI induced an 
antidepressant-like effect characterized by a reduced immobility and increased 
swimming for FLX and decreased immobility and increased climbing for DMI.
Both 
E(2) and EE(2) produced a decrease in immobility and an increase in swimming, 
suggesting an antidepressant-like action.
DES did not affect the responses in 
this animal model of depression at any dose tested.
The time course analysis of 
the actions of E(2) (10 microg/rat) and EE(2) (5 microg/rat) showed that both 
compounds induced an antidepressant-like effect observed 1 h after their 
injection lasting for 2-3 days.
DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300097
PMID: 12637949 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effects fo dantrolene sodium on cardiac and skeletal muscle in rats 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1976 Sep;39(1):127-31. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(76)90120-5.

The effects of dantrolene sodium on cardiac and skeletal muscle in rats.

Meyler MJ
 Wesseling H, Agoston S.

Dantrolene sodium in different concentrations was administered to the 
spontaneously beating heart placed in a modified Langendorff apparatus.
Heart 
frequency and contractility were recorded.
Dantrolene sodium was also 
administered to the rat diaphragm.
Twitch tension after indirect supramaximal 
stimulation was recorded.
Dantrolene sodium produced a long lasting 
dose-dependent reduction of the contractility of the isolated rat heart up to 
75% of control values.
It had no effect on the heart frequency.
The drug also 
decreased the force of contraction of the rat skeletal muscle in vitro to the 
same extent.
The diaphragm appeared to be more sensitive to low concentrations 
of dantrolene sodium than was heart muscle i.e.
the dose-response curve on rat 
diaphragm was flatter.
It may be concluded however that higher concentrations of 
dantrolene sodium may effect the contractility of heart muscle as well and that 
this may have clinical implications.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(76)90120-5
PMID: 964299 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Influence of 5-hydroxytryptamine on the pressor responses induced by norepinephrine and electrical sympathetic stimulation in the pithed rat. 1. Arch Med Res. 1996 Autumn;27(3):291-7.

Influence of 5-hydroxytryptamine on the pressor responses induced by 
norepinephrine and electrical sympathetic stimulation in the pithed rat.

Terrón JA(1)
 Sánchez-López A, Ramírez-San Juan E, Castillo C, Villalón CM.
Author information:
(1)Departamento de Farmacología y Toxicología, CINVESTAV, I.P.N., México, D.F.
Serotonin (5-hydroxytryptamine; 5-HT) modifies the responses to several 
vasoconstrictor stimuli prejunctionally and/or postjunctionally.
The present 
study analyzed the effects of 5-HT on the pressor responses induced by 
norepinephrine (NE) or electrical sympathetic stimulation in pithed rats.
Responses to intravenous (i.v.)
NE (0.03-3 micrograms/kg) or electrical 
stimulation at increasing frequencies (0.1-3 Hz) were evaluated before and 
during continuous i.v.
infusions of physiological saline (0.01 ml/min) or 5-HT 
(1-10 micrograms/kg x min).
The effects of 5-HT on the tachycardic responses to 
NE and sympathetic stimulation were studied in parallel.
The increases in 
diastolic blood pressure and heart rate produced by NE were not modified by 
5-HT.
In contrast, 5-HT significantly and dose-dependently inhibited the 
increases in diastolic blood pressure - but not those in heart rate - produced 
by stimulation of the appropriate spinal segments.
These effects of 5-HT were 
more pronounced on the responses to lower frequencies of stimulation.
It is 
suggested that 5-HT inhibits the electrically induced pressor responses by a 
prejunctional mechanism which would lead to a reduction of neurotransmitter 
release from the sympathetic nerves supplying the systemic vasculature.
The 
selective stimulation of this inhibitory mechanism might represent a new 
approach for the development of novel antihypertensive agents.
PMID: 8854384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
EFFECTS OF DIVALENT CATIONS ON THE SPONTANEOUS TRANSMITTER RELEASE AT THE AMPHIBIAN NEUROMUSCULAR JUNCTION IN THE PRESENCE OF ETHANOL 1. Jpn J Physiol. 1970 Feb 15;20(1):97-111.

Effects of divalent cations on the spontaneous transmitter release at the 
amphibian neuromuscular junction in the presence of ethanol.

Okada K.

PMID: 5311129 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Decrease in plasma prostaglandin E2 is not essential for the establishment of continuous breathing at birth in sheep. 1. J Dev Physiol. 1989 Sep;12(3):145-51.

Decrease in plasma prostaglandin E2 is not essential for the establishment of 
continuous breathing at birth in sheep.

Lee DS(1)
 Choy P, Davi M, Caces R, Gibson D, Hasan SU, Cates D, Rigatto H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatrics and Biochemistry, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, 
Canada.
Depression of prostanoid concentrations by indomethacin induces continuous 
breathing in fetal sheep, but it is not known whether this is associated with 
changes in fetal behaviour.
Furthermore, the relationship between changes in 
prostaglandin E2 (PGE2) concentration after delivery and the appearance of 
continuous breathing has not been examined.
We hypothesized that the decrease in 
fetal PGE2 by infusion of indomethacin would induce continuous breathing and a 
change in behaviour such that the fetus should come to resemble a newborn lamb; 
and coinciding with the establishment of continuous breathing at birth, PGE2 
concentrations would decrease to a critical level below that present in the 
fetus.
We found that continuous breathing in fetal sheep induced by infusion of 
indomethacin was related to a decrease in PGE2 from 436 +/- 114 to 189 +/- 73 
pg/ml (P less than 0.005) but that this was not associated with fetal 
wakefulness.
In addition, measurements of carotid arterial PGE2 concentrations 
showed that the beginning of continuous breathing after birth occurred at a 
plasma concentration of PGE2 of 1245 +/- 260 pg/ml, a value about three times 
higher than the 422 +/- 53 pg/ml measured in the fetus during breathing 
activity.
Together these findings suggest that PGE2 is not primarily involved in 
the establishment of continuous breathing at birth.
PMID: 2625514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Prospect of FKBP51 as a Drug Target <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The FK506 binding protein 51 (FKBP51) is best known as an Hsp90‐associated co‐chaperone that regulates the responsiveness of steroid hormone receptors. In human genetic association studies
 FKBP51 has repeatedly been associated with emotion processing and numerous stress‐related affective disorders.
It has also been implicated in contributing to the glucocorticoid hyposensitivity observed in New World primates.
More recently, several research groups have consistently shown a protective effect of FKBP51 knockout or knockdown on stress endocrinology and stress‐coping behavior in animal models of depression and anxiety.
The principal druggability of FKBP51 is exemplified by the prototypic FKBP ligands FK506 and rapamycin.
Moreover, FKBP51 is highly suited for X‐ray co‐crystallography, which should facilitate the rational drug design of improved FKBP51 ligands.
In summary, FKBP51 has emerged as a promising new drug target for stress‐related disorders that should be amenable to drug discovery.</jats:p>
Annual circulating testosterone levels in captive and free-ranging male armadillos (Dasypus novemcinctus) 1. J Reprod Fertil. 1980 May;59(1):199-204. doi: 10.1530/jrf.0.0590199.

Annual circulating testosterone levels in captive and free-ranging male 
armadillos (Dasypus novemcincuts).

Czekala NM
 HOdges JK, Gause GE, Lasley BL.
Mean circulating concentrations and seasonal changes in plasma testosterone over 
3 years were similar in free-ranging and captive male armadillos.
The highest 
concentrations were seen in the summer months, i.e.
at the time of maximum 
breeding, but the relatiely high values at other times and the inability of ACTH 
to restore dexamethasone-suppressed testosterone concentrations confirms that 
testicular function continues throughout the year.
There was a gradual rise in 
plasma testosterone to adult levels from the 5th to the 9th month of life in 
captive-born males, indicating that sexual maturity is reached within the first 
year of life and that captivity is not deleterious to Leydig cell function.
DOI: 10.1530/jrf.0.0590199
PMID: 6249926 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Behavioural effects of prenatal and postnatal undernutrition in rats. 1. Indian J Exp Biol. 1996 Dec;34(12):1216-9.

Behavioural effects of prenatal and postnatal undernutrition in rats.

Jaiswal AK(1)
 Upadhyay SN, Satyan KS, Bhattacharya SK.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Banaras Hindu University, Varanasi, India.
Effects of pre- and post-natal undernutrition on anxiety and depression 
paradigms were studied in albino rats.
Prenatal undernutrition was induced in 
rat pups by restricting the dam's daily food during the gestation period whereas 
postnatal undernutrition in rat pups was induced by rotating them between 
lactating and non-lactating maternalised females daily for 12 hr during suckling 
period from 2nd to 18th day after birth.
At 2.5 to 3 months of age all the rat 
pups were subjected to (i) elevated plus maze behaviour, (ii) open-field 
behaviour, and (iii) swimming induced behavioural despair tests.
The results 
indicate that postnatal undernutrition caused significantly increased anxiety in 
the elevated plus maze as well as in open-field behaviour tests.
Whereas 
prenatal undernourishment caused lesser degree of anxiogenic behaviours in the 
elevated plus maze test.
Prenatally undernourished rats showed increased anxiety 
in the open-field behaviour test.
Both, pre- and post-natal undernutrition also 
lead to increased depressive behaviour in the behavioural despair test and 
postnatal undernourishment caused greater degree of behavioural despair.
PMID: 9246914 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differential electrocardiographic effects of myocardial ischemia induced by atrial pacing in dogs with various locations of coronary stenosis. <jats:p>The spatial distribution of abnormal repolarization potentials caused by regional myocardial ischemia was determined in 45 dogs. Ameroid constrictors were placed around the left circumflex artery in 10
 the left anterior descending artery in 10, and the right coronary artery in 10.
Ten dogs without constrictors served as controls.
Electrocardiographic events were determined from body surface isopotential distributions, which were computed from potentials sensed by 84 torso electrodes.
In control dogs, pacing to heart rates of 230 to 250 beats/min increased the intensity of positive and negative surface extrema during the ST segment without altering their spatial features.
Two weeks after placement of the ameroid constrictors, tachycardia induced abnormal negative potentials during the ST segment.
Localization of these ischemic forces varied with the placement of the constrictor in a manner consistent with the affected perfusion territories.
However, much of the torso surface was involved by all lesions, and only small zones of ST segment depression unique to specific lesions could be identified.
In five additional dogs a constrictor was placed on the right coronary artery 3 months after implantation of a device on the circumflex vessel.
ST segment patterns during pacing in dogs with two lesions were consistent with the sum of the two individual lesions.
Thus, the regional nature of myocardial ischemia is detectable in the body surface isopotential distributions, but the degree of spatial overlap may limit the value of such techniques in extending the usefulness of clinical exercise-stress electrocardiography.</jats:p>
Pharmacological characterization of repeated corticosterone injection-induced depression model in rats 1. Brain Res. 2010 Nov 4;1359:75-80. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.08.078. Epub
2010  Sep 21.

Pharmacological characterization of repeated corticosterone injection-induced 
depression model in rats.

Iijima M(1)
 Ito A, Kurosu S, Chaki S.

Author information:
(1)Discovery Pharmacology, Molecular Function and Pharmacology Laboratories, 
Taisho Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 1-403 Yoshino-cho, Kita-ku, Saitama, Saitama 
331-9530, Japan.
Dysfunction of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis has been reported 
in patients with psychotic major depression (PMD), and a higher rate of cortisol 
hypersecretion is observed in PMD than in nonpsychotic patients.
Approximately 
19% of patients who meet the criteria for major depressive disorder (MDD) have 
psychotic features.
Accumulated studies have indicated that repeated 
corticosterone (CORT) injections induce depressive behavioral and neurochemical 
manifestations in rodents.
However, the pharmacological characterization of this 
model has not been fully established.
In the present study, we investigated the 
pharmacological characteristics of this model.
Rats received CORT injections (20 
mg/kg, subcutaneously), once per day for 21 consecutive days prior to a 
behavioral test.
The rats were then tested for depressive behavior using a 
forced swimming test.
The repeated CORT injections increased the immobility time 
in the forced swimming test, indicating an increase in depressive-like behavior.
An acute treatment with a glucocorticoid receptor antagonist, mifepristone, 
counteracted the depressive-like behavior.
In contrast, an acute treatment with 
a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI), fluvoxamine, and a tricyclic 
antidepressant (TCA), imipramine, did not have any effect on this condition, 
while a combination of fluvoxamine and risperidone exerted an 
antidepressant-like effect.
This observation is of interest in the light of the 
clinical findings that a combination of antidepressants and antipsychotics, but 
not SSRIs and TCAs, is effective for the treatment of patients with PMD.
Based 
on previous findings and the present results, this model could be used as an 
animal model of PMD and may be useful for evaluating the antidepressant-like 
potential of compounds targeting the HPA axis.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.08.078
PMID: 20813098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of castrix (crimidin) on pyridoxal-5'-phosphate and the activity of pyridoxal kinase. 1. Acta Vet Scand. 1973;14(4):495-500.

The effect of castrix (crimidin) on pyridoxal-5'-phosphate and the activity of 
pyridoxal kinase.

Hansen KL.

PMID: 4755759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effects of excluding reticuloseptal input on hippocampal electrical activity in the cat]. 1. Fiziol Zh SSSR Im I M Sechenova. 1985 Jan;71(1):80-6.

[Effects of excluding reticuloseptal input on hippocampal electrical activity in 
the cat].

[Article in Russian]

Gloveli TB.

The effect of interruption of the reticulo-septal input on the electrical 
activity of CA1 and CA3 areas of the dorsal hippocampus was studied in cats. 
Lesion of the medial septal nuclei or the i.v. injection of chlorpromazine in 
low doses led to depression of the hippocampal theta activity. The 
reticulo-septal input is responsible for generation and the course of tonic 
sensory responses of the hippocampal neurons in both areas. The existence of the 
remaining principal types of sensory responses (phasic
 complex) mainly depends 
upon the cortical input.
The reticulo-septal input takes part only in the 
prolongation of these responses.
PMID: 3972140 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Peripheral versus central cardiorespiratory effects of morphine 1. Neuropharmacology. 1982 Oct;21(10):1019-26. doi: 10.1016/0028-3908(82)90116-2.

Peripheral versus central cardiorespiratory effects of morphine.

Willette RN
 Sapru HN.
The administration of morphine sulfate (MS, 2 mg/kg) into the right atrium in 
decerebrate rats, produced a dramatic bradycardia, apnea, and a slight transient 
biphasic blood pressure response within 1 sec.
The bradycardia was slowly 
restored to control levels within 8-10 min and was prevented by pretreatment 
with atropine.
Apnea (7.3 +/- 2.2 sec) was followed by a period of rapid shallow 
breathing.
Acute tolerance to these effects developed to subsequent doses of 
morphine.
In paralyzed artificially ventilated animals, morphine produced: (1) 
cessation of phrenic nerve (PN) activity which was followed by bursts of 
shortened duration; and (2) concomitant excitation of the recurrent laryngeal 
nerve (RLN), this activity exhibited a continuous discharge which was 
asynchronous with that of phrenic nerve.
These actions of morphine were 
qualitatively similar to those observed with phenyldiguanide (PDG) and were 
found to be reflexogenic, i.e.
emanating from the lungs via stimulation of 
pulmonary C-fibers.
Bilaterally vagotomized animals only responded to morphine 
with respiratory depression, characterized by a severe decrease in respiratory 
rate and minute ventilation.
On the other hand, animals with intact vagi showed 
stimulation of rate and minute ventilation following a brief period of apnea.
They were less sensitive than vagotomized animals to the depressant action 
during the first 8 min after administration of morphine.
All the effects of 
morphine were blocked by pretreatment with naloxone (50-400 micrograms/kg, 
i.v.).
These results indicate that the initial cardiorespiratory effects of 
morphine are due to a peripheral reflex action arising from the stimulation of 
opiate receptors associated with pulmonary C-fibers, e.g.
J-fibers.
DOI: 10.1016/0028-3908(82)90116-2
PMID: 6292766 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Synthesis of DNA in the Liver and Testes of Cadmium-Treated Partially Hepatectomized Rats 1. J Biochem. 1979 Sep;86(3):657-62. doi: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a132569.

Synthesis of DNA in the liver and testes of cadmium-tested partially 
hepatectomized rats.

Cihák A
 Inoue H.

Cadmium affects the induction of thymidine and thymidylate kinases in 
regenerating rat liver.
EDTA administered simultaneously with cadmium reverses 
its inhibitory action on enzyme synthesis, and prevents the depression of 
thymidine incorporation into DNA observed in cadmium-treated animals.
Zinc does 
not abolish the inhibitory action of cadmium on the synthesis of DNA in 
regenerating liver, and the incorporation of thymidine into DNA in the testes 
was inhibited more by intraperitoneal injection of cadmium plus zinc than by 
injection of cadmium alone.
Inhibition of thymidine incorporation into DNA in 
the liver and testes was proportional to the amount of cadmium administered up 
to about 2 mg CdCl2/kg body weight, but surprisingly, higher doses of cadmium 
caused less inhibition.
DOI: 10.1093/oxfordjournals.jbchem.a132569
PMID: 229099 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of propranolol and isoprenaline on ST segment and regional left ventricular blood flow in experimental myocardial ischaemia. 1. Br Heart J. 1973 May;35(5):551.

Effect of propranolol and isoprenaline on ST segment and regional left 
ventricular blood flow in experimental myocardial ischaemia.

Becker L
 Ferreira R, Thomas M.

PMID: 4716019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A Novel Family of Negative and Positive Allosteric Modulators of NMDA Receptors 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2010 Dec;335(3):614-21. doi: 10.1124/jpet.110.174144.
Epub  2010 Sep 21.

A novel family of negative and positive allosteric modulators of NMDA receptors.

Costa BM(1)
 Irvine MW, Fang G, Eaves RJ, Mayo-Martin MB, Skifter DA, Jane DE, 
Monaghan DT.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Experimental Neuroscience, University of 
Nebraska Medical Center, Omaha, Nebraska 68198-5800, USA.
The N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptor family regulates various central 
nervous system functions, such as synaptic plasticity.
However, hypo- or 
hyperactivation of NMDA receptors is critically involved in many neurological 
and psychiatric conditions, such as pain, stroke, epilepsy, neurodegeneration, 
schizophrenia, and depression.
Consequently, subtype-selective positive and 
negative modulators of NMDA receptor function have many potential therapeutic 
applications not addressed by currently available compounds.
We have identified 
allosteric modulators with several novel patterns of NMDA receptor subtype 
selectivity that have a novel mechanism of action.
In a series of carboxylated 
naphthalene and phenanthrene derivatives, compounds were identified that 
selectively potentiate responses at GluN1/GluN2A [e.g., 
9-iodophenanthrene-3-carboxylic acid (UBP512)]; GluN1/GluN2A and GluN1/GluN2B 
[9-cyclopropylphenanthrene-3-carboxylic acid (UBP710)]; GluN1/GluN2D 
[3,5-dihydroxynaphthalene-2-carboxylic acid (UBP551)]; or GluN1/GluN2C and 
GluN1/GluN2D receptors [6-, 7-, 8-, and 9-nitro isomers of 
naphth[1,2-c][1,2,5]oxadiazole-5-sulfonic acid (NSC339614)] and have no effect 
or inhibit responses at the other NMDA receptors.
Selective inhibition was also 
observed; UBP512 inhibits only GluN1/GluN2C and GluN1/GluN2D receptors, whereas 
6-bromo-2-oxo-2H-chromene-3-carboxylic acid (UBP608) inhibits GluN1/GluN2A 
receptors with a 23-fold selectivity compared with GluN1/GluN2D receptors.
The 
actions of these compounds were not competitive with the agonists L-glutamate or 
glycine and were not voltage-dependent.
Whereas the N-terminal regulatory domain 
was not necessary for activity of either potentiators or inhibitors, segment 2 
of the agonist ligand-binding domain was important for potentiating activity, 
whereas subtype-specific inhibitory activity was dependent upon segment 1.
In 
terms of chemical structure, activity profile, and mechanism of action, these 
modulators represent a new class of pharmacological agents for the study of NMDA 
receptor subtype function and provide novel lead compounds for a variety of 
neurological disorders.
DOI: 10.1124/jpet.110.174144
PMCID: PMC2993558
PMID: 20858708 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Possible function of α1-adrenoceptors in the CNS in anaesthetized and conscious animals 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1985 Jan 8;107(3):305-11. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(85)90255-9.

Possible function of alpha 1-adrenoceptors in the CNS in anaesthetized and 
conscious animals.

Pichler L
 Kobinger W.

The influence of St 587 
(2-(2-chloro-5-trifluoromethylphenylimino)imidazolidine), a selective alpha 
1-adrenoceptor agonist which easily penetrates the blood-brain barrier, was 
tested on behavior and cardiovascular functions, respectively.
The substance (up 
to 10 mg/kg subcutaneously (s.c.)) did not increase the exploratory activity of 
naive mice.
The hexobarbitone 'sleeping' time in mice was reduced in a 
dose-dependent manner (St 587 ED50 = 14.4 mg/kg s.c.).
Haloperidol 10 mg/kg s.c. 
induced catalepsy which was antagonized by St 587 in a dose-dependent manner 
(ED50 = 2.7 mg/kg i.p.).
Conversely, the alpha 1-adrenoceptor-blocking agents 
prazosin and corynanthine elicited catalepsy in mice which had been treated with 
a subthreshold dose (2 mg/kg s.c.) of haloperidol; the ED50 values of the 
antagonists were 0.26 and 4.7 mg/kg i.p., respectively.
In anaesthetized cats 
blood pressure and heart rate were not affected by 100 micrograms/kg St 587 
injected into the left vertebral artery.
In conscious dogs with 
beta-adrenoceptors blocked, the drug was without effect (100 micrograms/kg 
intracisternally) on vagally mediated reflex bradycardia, as evoked by 
intravenous noradrenaline injection.
As a positive control the alpha 
2-adrenoceptor agonist B-HT 920 which is equipotent to St 587 with respect to 
peripheral vasopressor effects in rats was injected with 10 micrograms/kg 
intracisternally and facilitated the reflex bradycardia.
It is concluded that 
alpha 1-adrenoceptors within the brain mediate behavioral activation in states 
of CNS depression but remain without effect on cardiovascular centers.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(85)90255-9
PMID: 2984009 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sulfide Intoxication-Induced Circulatory Failure is Mediated by a Depression in Cardiac Contractility 1. Cardiovasc Toxicol. 2016 Jan;16(1):67-78. doi: 10.1007/s12012-015-9309-z.

Sulfide Intoxication-Induced Circulatory Failure is Mediated by a Depression in 
Cardiac Contractility.

Sonobe T(1)
 Haouzi P(2).
Author information:
(1)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine, 500 University Drive, H041, 
Hershey, PA, 17033, USA.
(2)Division of Pulmonary and Critical Care Medicine, Department of Medicine, 
Pennsylvania State University, College of Medicine, 500 University Drive, H041, 
Hershey, PA, 17033, USA.
phaouzi@hmc.psu.edu.
Hydrogen sulfide (H2S) intoxication produces a rapid cardio-circulatory failure 
leading to cardiac arrest.
In non-lethal forms of sulfide exposure, the presence 
of a circulatory shock is associated with long-term neurological sequelae.
Our 
aim was to clarify the mechanisms of H2S-induced circulatory failure.
In 
anesthetized, paralyzed, and mechanically ventilated rats, cardiac output, 
arterial pressure and ventricular pressures were determined while NaHS was 
infused to increase arterial concentration of soluble H2S (CgH2S) from 
undetectable to levels leading to circulatory failure.
Compared to 
control/saline infusion, blood pressure started to decrease significantly along 
with a modest drop in peripheral vascular resistance (-19 ± 5%, P < 0.01), when 
CgH2S reached about 1 μM.
As CgH2S exceeded 2-3 μM, parameters of ventricular 
contractility diminished with no further reduction in peripheral resistance.
Whenever H2S exposure was maintained at a higher level (CgH2S over 7 μM), a 
severe depression of cardiac contractility was observed, leading to asystole 
within minutes, but with no evidence of peripheral vasoplegia.
The immediate and 
long-term neurological effects of specifically counteracting sulfide-induced 
cardiac contractility depression following H2S exposure remain to be 
investigated.
DOI: 10.1007/s12012-015-9309-z
PMCID: PMC4514577
PMID: 25616319 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflicts of interest: The authors declare that 
they have no conflict of interest.
Bidirectional changes in synapsin I phosphorylation at MAP kinase‐dependent sites by acute neuronal excitation <i>in vivo</i> <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Synapsin I is a synaptic vesicle‐associated protein which is phosphorylated at multiple sites by various kinases. It has been proposed to play a role in the regulation of neurotransmitter release and the organization of cytoskeletal architecture in the presynaptic terminal. To better understand the physiological regulation of its phosphorylation <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>
 we induced acute, reversible neuronal excitation by electroconvulsive treatment (ECT) in rats, and studied its effects on synapsin I phosphorylation at sites 3, 4/5 and 6 by immunoblot analyses of homogenates from hippocampus and parietal cortex using phospho‐site‐specific antibodies.
A decrease in phosphorylation at all sites was observed soon after the electrical stimulation, followed by a large increase in phosphorylation at site 4/5 peaking at 5 min and a moderate increase in phosphorylation at site 6 peaking at 20 min.
Systemic injection of SL327, a mitogen‐activated protein kinase (MAPK) kinase inhibitor, prior to ECT, suppressed the increase in phospho‐site 4/5 level, as well as that in MAPK activity, but not that in phospho‐site 6 level.
Thus, phosphorylation at site 4/5 of synapsin I has been shown to be regulated by MAPK <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>.</jats:p>
Effect of aminophylline on the respiratory depressant action of intravenous adenosine in neonatal rabbits 1. Life Sci. 1987 Jan 5;40(1):29-34. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(87)90248-7.

Effect of aminophylline on the respiratory depressant action of intravenous 
adenosine in neonatal rabbits.

Watt AH
 Buss DC, Routledge PA.

We administered intravenous adenosine to 11 neonatal rabbits.
Adenosine 
depressed respiration in 10 of 11 rabbits.
For the group as a whole the 
adenosine-induced respiratory depression was highly significant (p less than 
0.001).
After aminophylline administration to the same animals the respiratory 
effect of intravenous adenosine was abolished in 3 animals.
In 7 animals the 
effect of adenosine was reversed and respiratory stimulation was observed.
After 
aminophylline adenosine produced a significant (p less than 0.001) increase in 
respiration in the group studied.
The alteration of responses to intravenous 
adenosine by aminophylline in neonatal rabbits is similar to the effect of 
aminophylline on respiratory responses to hypoxia in neonates.
Such an effect of 
aminophylline and other methylxanthines on adenosine actions, possibly central 
in site may explain their beneficial effect in the treatment of apnoea in the 
human neonate.
DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(87)90248-7
PMID: 3796210 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Modeling Short-Term Synaptic Plasticity at the Calyx of Held Using In Vivo-Like Stimulation Patterns <jats:p> We measured synaptic responses to complex stimulus trains in the calyx of Held and used the data to test how well several vesicle-release models could capture the observed dynamics. We tested stimulation protocols consisting of Poisson-distributed activity with periodically changing mean frequencies
 trains with constant inter spike intervals, and stimulus trains derived from in vivo responses to natural sounds.
All stimuli were embedded in chronic background activity attempting to imitate the naturally occurring spontaneous activity in the auditory brain stem.
We found that already the most basic model variant produced very good results, exhibiting very high correlation coefficients between the experimental data and the model predictions.
None of the more complex model variants, which incorporated receptor desensitization, synaptic facilitation, and double-exponential recovery from depression, showed improved data-prediction matching accuracy.
These findings are in contrast to previous modeling work performed in nonchronically active synapses, where the inclusion of additional physiological parameters into the modeling process tended to result in models with higher accuracy.
Our findings suggest that the functional state of chronically active calyces may differ from the functional state of silent calyces and that this functional state of chronically active synapses can be described in relatively simple terms.
</jats:p>
Anxiety and Comorbid Measures Associated With PLXNA2 1. Arch Gen Psychiatry. 2007 Mar;64(3):318-26. doi: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.3.318.

Anxiety and comorbid measures associated with PLXNA2.

Wray NR(1)
 James MR, Mah SP, Nelson M, Andrews G, Sullivan PF, Montgomery GW, 
Birley AJ, Braun A, Martin NG.
Author information:
(1)Queensland Institute of Medical Research, Royal Brisbane Hospital, Brisbane, 
QLD 4029, Australia.
naomi.wray@qimr.edu.au

CONTEXT: Reduction in adult neurogenesis has been proposed as a mechanism for 
onset of depression.
Semaphorins and their coreceptors, plexins, have been 
implicated in nervous system development and in adult neurogenesis.
A recent 
genomewide association study of schizophrenia identified a variant of the gene 
encoding plexin A2 (PLXNA2) to be most consistently associated across study 
samples.
Common genetic liabilities have been reported between psychiatric and 
psychological measures, but few examples exist of common genetic variants.
OBJECTIVE: To perform a genetic association study between 6 single nucleotide 
polymorphisms from the PLXNA2 gene (rs3736963, rs2767565, rs752016, rs1327175, 
rs2478813, and rs716461) and anxiety, depression, neuroticism, and psychological 
distress.
DESIGN: Extreme discordant and concordant siblings.
SETTING: Australia.
PARTICIPANTS: Study participants were selected with respect to extreme 
neuroticism scores from a population cohort of 18 742 twin individuals and their 
siblings.
The participants and their parents (if blood or buccal samples were 
available) were genotyped, for a total of 2854 genotyped individuals from 990 
families.
Of these, 624 individuals with a diagnosis of anxiety or depression 
from 443 families were used in the association analysis.
MAIN OUTCOME MEASURES: All the participants completed the Composite 
International Diagnostic Interview, the 23-item Neuroticism scale of the revised 
Eysenck Personality Questionnaire, and the 10-item Kessler Psychological 
Distress Scale.
Diagnoses of DSM-IV depression and anxiety were determined from 
the Composite International Diagnostic Interview.
RESULTS: There was evidence of an allelic association between rs2478813 (and 
other single nucleotide polymorphisms correlated with it) and anxiety, 
depression, neuroticism, and psychological distress; the association with 
anxiety is significant after Bonferroni correction for multiple testing 
(empirical P<.001).
The mouse ortholog of PLXNA2 is located in a highly 
significant linkage region previously reported for anxiety in mice.
CONCLUSION: PLXNA2 is a candidate for causal variation in anxiety and in other 
psychiatric disorders through its comorbidity with anxiety.
DOI: 10.1001/archpsyc.64.3.318
PMID: 17339520 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Diisopropylammonium dichloroacetate (DIPA): reversible antagonism towards smooth muscle stimulants and inhibition of acetylcholinesterase in the isolated guinea pig ileum. 1. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol. 1971 Jul-Sep;2(4):439-46.

Diisopropylammonium dichloroacetate (DIPA): reversible antagonism towards smooth 
muscle stimulants and inhibition of acetylcholinesterase in the isolated guinea 
pig ileum.

Stacpoole PW
 Iwamoto E, Glasgow CE.
PMID: 5139065 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differential modulation of lipopolysaccharide- and zymosan-induced hypophagia by dexamethasone treatment 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 2008 Sep;90(3):428-33. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2008.03.027.  Epub 2008 Apr 4.

Differential modulation of lipopolysaccharide- and zymosan-induced hypophagia by 
dexamethasone treatment.

Saito M(1)
 Watanabe S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Application, Institute of Natural Medicine, University 
of Toyama, 2630 Sugitani, Toyama 930-0194, Japan.
The treatment of experimental animals with lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces 
behavioral depression, in which the central and peripheral inductions of 
proinflammatory cytokines are proposed to play an important role.
We have shown 
that the intraperitoneal injection of zymosan, composed of insoluble particles 
prepared from yeast cell walls, can induce behavioral depression assessed as 
hypophagia in mice, although the role of proinflammatory cytokines in this 
response has not yet been investigated.
We have also shown that the subcutaneous 
injection of the corticoid, dexamethasone (Dex), a potent inhibitor of cytokine 
production, is effective in attenuating hypophagia in LPS-treated mice.
The 
attenuated response was associated with the suppression of the gene induction of 
proinflammatory cytokines (i.e., IL-1beta, IL-6 and TNFalpha) in the brain and 
liver.
In contrast, no significant induction of proinflammatory cytokine genes 
was observed in the brain or liver during zymosan-induced hypophagia; the 
subcutaneous injection of Dex did not attenuate zymosan-induced hypophagia but 
its intraperitoneal injection did.
Thus, zymosan-induced hypophagia was less 
responsive to a subcutaneous injection of dexamethasone than LPS-induced 
hypophagia, which may be due to the limited role of systemic inflammation in 
this response.
An important role of localized, rather than systemic, 
inflammation in zymosan-induced hypophagia was suggested, although the role of 
local proinflammatory cytokines remains to be clarified.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2008.03.027
PMID: 18457866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dexamethasone Concentrations in Ovine Plasma During its Intravenous Infusion
 its Relation to the Production of Some Endogenous Hormones, and Some of the Effects on Wool Growth <jats:p>Plasma concentrations of dexamethasone have been measured in sheep during an 8-day infusion of dexamethasone-21-phosphate.
The dexamethasone concentration profiles generally revealed a reproducible pattern with three phases-a peak during the first 48 h infusion which was followed by falling concentrations during the next 5 days, and a small increase in dexamethasone concentration during the final 24 h infusion was not uncommon.
The pattern of dexamethasone concentrations was retained when dosage was arranged in such a way as to infuse increasing quantities of hormonal analogue as infusion progressed.
Aspects of the metabolism of the analogue are discussed.
</jats:p>
Images in Electroconvulsive Therapy 1. J ECT. 2014 Sep;30(3):193-4. doi: 10.1097/YCT.0000000000000076.

Images in electroconvulsive therapy: ECS dose-dependently increases cell 
proliferation in the subgranular region of the rat hippocampus.

Smitha JS(1)
 Roopa R, Sagar BK, Kutty BM, Andrade C.

Author information:
(1)From the *Department of Anatomy, St John's Medical College; Departments of 
†Neuropathology, ‡Neurophysiology, and §Psychopharmacology, National Institute 
of Mental Health and Neurosciences, Bangalore, India.
Stress and depression are associated with impaired neuroplasticity in the 
hippocampus; there is a decrease in neurogenesis, which is hypothesized to 
decrease the adaptative competence of the organism.
Representative light 
microscopy images are presented which show that 6 once-daily electroconvulsive 
shocks (ECS), dose-dependently increased new cell formation in the subgranular 
region of the hippocampus in healthy adult male Wistar rats (10 sections per 
rat, 3 rats in each of sham ECS, 10 mC, and 40 mC groups).
These neuroplasticity 
changes, demonstrated 1 month after the last ECS, may explain a part of the 
mechanism of action of electroconvulsive therapy in conditions such as 
depression.
DOI: 10.1097/YCT.0000000000000076
PMID: 24901429 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
THE EFFECT OF HIGH RATES OF VASOPRESSIN ADMINISTRATION ON RENAL POTASSIUM AND SODIUM EXCRETION DURING POTASSIUM LOADING IN THE SHEEP <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The influence of potassium loading on the renal excretion of sodium
 potassium and solute during high rate vasopressin administration has been investigated in sheep.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Adrenalectomized sheep were infused with 0.43 <jats:sc>m</jats:sc> KCl at 2 ml/min for 2–2.5 hours.
Coincident with the rise in plasma potassium concentration, the urinary excretion of sodium, potassium, solute and water was increased as was the reabsorption of solute‐free water.
The rates of urinary excretion of sodium and potassium, osmolal clearance (<jats:italic>C</jats:italic><jats:sub>Osm</jats:sub>) and solute‐free water reabsorption (T<jats:sup>c</jats:sup>H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>O) for the first 50 min of potassium infusion were each found to be linearly related to the plasma potassium concentration.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>After 50 min an infusion of vasopressin at 1 or 4 mu/min was superimposed on the potassium infusion for a period of 30 minutes.
The administration of vasopressin was consistently associated with further augmentation of potassium excretion and clearance, of osmolal clearance and of solute‐free water reabsorption to values above those anticipated from the pre‐vasopressin regression lines for these parameters.
Urinary sodium showed a coincident depression in the rate of excretion and clearance during the same period.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Thirty to fifty minutes after the cessation of vasopressin infusion the potassium and sodium excretions had returned to values which approximated the pre‐vasopressin relations between plasma potassium and the urinary excretions of these ions.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Both rates of vasopressin infusion were equally effective in increasing the potassium clearance.
Any differences in clearance between the two rates of vasopressin administration were not statistically significant.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The large increments in potassium excretion (averaging &gt; 40%) were interpreted as indicating that, when vasopressin is present at high concentrations, the distal tubule is one site of action of the hormone in the nephron of sheep.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Combination Pharmacotherapy in Alcoholism: A Novel Treatment Approach <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Combination pharmacotherapy has proven effective in a number of psychiatric disorders
 including depression and schizophrenia.
However, compared with other affective disorders, few studies have explored the use of combination therapy in alcoholism, and the majority have been limited to animal models.
There is evidence to support a role for combination therapy in alcoholism.
For example, several neurochemical systems, including the dopaminergic, serotonergic, and opioidergic, appear to affect alcohol intake.
Studies in several different types of alcohol-preferring rats have suggested that coadministration of agents to target more than one of these systems simultaneously may produce beneficial effects on alcohol intake, while avoiding problematic effects, such as alterations in food or water intake.
Data from preliminary clinical studies have shown trends toward combination therapy reducing alcohol intake in humans.
While such findings are encouraging, they must be explored further in larger, randomized, double-blind trials.</jats:p>
Interhemispheric difference in susceptibility to epileptogenesis: Evidence from the audiogenic kindling model in Wistar rats 1. Brain Res. 2010 May 6;1329:175-81. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.03.037. Epub 
2010 Mar 18.

Interhemispheric difference in susceptibility to epileptogenesis: evidence from 
the audiogenic kindling model in Wistar rats.

Vinogradova LV(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology
 Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Butlerova Street 5A, Moscow 117485, Russia.
lvinogradova@gmail.com

Audiogenic kindling (AK) represents a model of naturally occurring 
epileptogenesis in which intensification of repeatedly induced audiogenic 
seizures results from propagation of epileptic activity from the brainstem to 
forebrain.
Previously it has been shown that unilateral cortical spreading 
depression (SD) is a reliable earliest manifestation of mild AK produced by 
repetition of minimal audiogenic seizures (running) in Wistar rats.
The 
unilateral triggering SD suggests the existence of asymmetry in the forebrain 
recruitment during the kindling and the present study examined whether 
epileptogenesis produced by this mild AK paradigm is a lateralized process.
Twenty five running episodes were induced by brief sound stimulation in Wistar 
rats susceptible to audiogenic seizures.
Behavioral and EEG correlates of AK 
development were assessed.
Running behavior elicited by brief sound stimulation 
had an asymmetrical pattern with profound preference for one direction.
Most 
rats expressing leftward running displayed full kindling development whereas the 
majority of rats with rightward running were resistant to AK.
The EEG marker of 
AK, a cortical epileptiform discharge, was recorded only in rats with leftward 
running and the first discharge appeared in the left cortex.
Cortical SD was 
recorded after repeated running seizures in all rats with reproducible 
audiogenic response irrespective of the running lateralization and propensity to 
kindling.
Until the late kindling stages, SD was triggered unilaterally in the 
cortex ipsilateral to the running direction.
These findings indicate 
intrinsically determined lateralization of epileptogenic process in the mild AK 
model and enhanced vulnerability of the left hemisphere to epileptogenesis.
Copyright 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2010.03.037
PMID: 20303340 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Nitric Oxide Synthesis Inhibition on Post-Occlusive Choroidal Blood Flow in Rats 1. J Ocul Pharmacol Ther. 2000 Feb;16(1):55-64. doi: 10.1089/jop.2000.16.55.

Effect of nitric oxide synthesis inhibition on post-occlusive choroidal blood 
flow in rats.

Koss MC(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology
 University of Oklahoma College of Medicine, 
Oklahoma City 73190, USA.
michael-koss@uohsc.edu

Experiments were designed to study involvement of nitric oxide on vascular 
responses to ocular ischemia in the anesthetized rat.
Anterior choroidal blood 
flow was measured using laser-Doppler flowmetry.
In some experiments, cerebral 
cortical blood flow also was measured.
Ischemia was produced by either occlusion 
of the cephalic blood supply or more locally via a ligature tightened around the 
eye stalk.
Arterial blood pressure and choroidal blood flow was continuously 
measured before, during and after a 20 min ischemic challenge.
Both methods of 
ischemia reduced choroidal blood flow (>90%) with no consistent ocular hyperemia 
seen upon reperfusion.
No significant differences in response pattern between 
the two ischemia techniques were apparent.
Treatment with the non-selective 
inhibitor of nitric oxide (L-NAME 2 mg/kg, i.v.)
did not alter either basal 
choroidal blood flow or the pattern of reperfusion.
A larger dose of L-NAME (50 
mg/kg, i.v.)
reduced both basal choroidal blood flow and the final reperfusion 
level (most likely due to continued depression of the basal ocular choroidal 
blood flow).
Neither D-NAME nor the neuronal nitric oxide synthase inhibitor, 
7-nitroindazole, altered basal anterior choroidal blood flow or the reperfusion 
pattern seen after reperfusion.
The results confirm our previous observations 
that inhibition of endothelial nitric oxide lowers.
basal choroidal blood flow 
in the rat eye.
However, in contrast to the cerebral circulation where L-NAME 
greatly attenuates initial reperfusion to the cerebral cortex, inhibition of 
nitric oxide synthase does not appear to notably further influence anterior 
choroidal reperfusion.
DOI: 10.1089/jop.2000.16.55
PMID: 10673132 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of AMPA receptor trafficking in NMDA receptor‐dependent synaptic plasticity in the rat lateral amygdala <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Stimulated exocytosis and endocytosis of post‐synaptic α‐amino‐3‐hydroxy‐5‐methyl‐4‐isoxazolepropionic acid subtype of glutamate receptors (AMPARs) have been proposed as primary mechanisms for the expression of hippocampal CA1 long‐term potentiation (LTP) and long‐term depression (LTD)
 respectively.
LTP and LTD, the two most well characterized forms of synaptic plasticity, are thought to be important for learning and memory in behaving animals.
Both LTP and LTD can also be induced in the lateral amygdala (LA), a critical structure involved in fear conditioning.
However, the role of AMPAR trafficking in the expression of either LTP or LTD in this structure remains unclear.
In this study, we show that NMDA receptor‐dependent LTP and LTD can be reliably induced at the synapses of the auditory thalamic inputs to the LA in brain slices.
The expression of LTP was prevented by post‐synaptic blockade of vesicle‐mediated exocytosis with application of a light chain of <jats:italic>Clostridium tetanus</jats:italic> neurotoxin and was associated with increased cell‐surface AMPAR expression.
In contrast, the expression of LTD was prevented by post‐synaptic application of a glutamate receptor 2‐derived interference peptide, which specifically blocks the stimulated clathrin‐dependent endocytosis of AMPARs, and was correlated with a reduction in plasma membrane‐surface expression of AMPARs.
These results strongly suggest that regulated trafficking of post‐synaptic AMPARs is also involved in the expression of LTP and LTD in the LA.</jats:p>
The Differential Effects of Diestrous Progestogen Administration on Proestrous Gonadotrophin Levels 1. Endocrinology. 1975 Oct;97(4):885-90. doi: 10.1210/endo-97-4-885.

The differential effects of diestrous progestogen administration of proestrous 
gonadotrophin levels.

Beattie CW
 Corbin A.

Progesterone or d-norgestrel, a totally synthetic progestogen, administered 
subcutaneously at 1330 h on diestrus (Day 2) of 4-day cyclic rats, inhibited 
ovulation and increased the vaginal cycle length in a dose-related manner.
d-norgestrel was at least 5 times as potent as inhibitor of ovulation as 
progesterone.
The dose-related inhibition of ovulation was directly related to 
suppression of the proestrous serum LH surge.
Proestrous serum FSH levels were 
not depressed at the minimum dose of d-norgestrel that produced both a 100% 
reduction in ovulation (MED100) and a significant decrease in proestrous serum 
LH.
However, progesterone produced a significant decrease in proestrous serum 
FSH at its anti-ovulatory MED100.
Progesterone and d-norgestrel were equipotent 
(100 mug/100 g BW) with respect to significant suppression of proestrous serum 
FSH levels.
Follicular growth was retarded, but only at the higher doses of 
either progestogen which suppressed FSH and LH.
These data suggest that a) the 
increase in acute anti-ovulatory potency of a synthetic non-estrogenic 
progestogen over progesterone lies in its ability to reduced selectively serum 
LH levels at low doses, b) the progestational block of ovulation takes place via 
the hypothalamic-pituitary axis and not the ovary, and c) the retardation of 
follicular growth that accompanies ovulatory inhibition after diestrous 
administration of high doses of a progestogen takes place only when both serum 
FSH and LH are significantly reduced.
DOI: 10.1210/endo-97-4-885
PMID: 1238248 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of melipramine on the development of an experimental depressive syndrome in rats
 caused by systemic administration of 1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)].
1.
Biull Eksp Biol Med.
1995 Aug;120(8):160-3.
[Effect of melipramine on the development of an experimental depressive syndrome 
in rats, caused by systemic administration of 
1-methyl-4-phenyl-1,2,3,6-tetrahydropyridine (MPTP)].
[Article in Russian]

Krupina NA, Orlova IN, Kryzhanovskiĭ GN.
PMID: 7579274 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[A comparison of the effect of the tricyclic antidepressants azaphen and imizin on the gastrointestinal tracts of experimental animals]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1975 Jan-Feb;38(1):29-32.

[A comparison of the effect of the tricyclic antidepressants azaphen and imizin 
on the gastrointestinal tracts of experimental animals].

[Article in Russian]

Liberman SS
 Sharova SA.
PMID: 1112390 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pairing-specific long-term depression of Purkinje cell excitatory postsynaptic potentials results from a classical conditioning procedure in the rabbit cerebellar slice <jats:p> 1. Using a rabbit cerebellar slice preparation
 we stimulated a classical conditioning procedure by stimulating parallel fiber inputs to Purkinje cells with the use of a brief, high-frequency train of eight constant-current pulses 80 ms before climbing fiber inputs to the same Purkinje cell were stimulated with the use of a brief, lower frequency train of three constant-current pulses.
In all experiments, we assessed the effects of stimulation by measuring the peak amplitude of Purkinje cell excitatory postsynaptic potentials (EPSPs) to single parallel fiber test pulses.
2.
Intradendritically recorded Purkinje cell EPSPs underwent a long-term (&gt; 20 min) reduction in peak amplitude (30%) after paired stimulation of the parallel and climbing fibers but not after unpaired or parallel fiber alone stimulation.
We call this phenomenon pairing-specific long-term depression (PSD).
3.
Facilitation of the peak amplitude of a second EPSP elicited by a parallel fiber train occurred both before and after paired stimulation suggesting that the locus of depression was not presynaptic.
Depression of the peak amplitude of a depolarizing response to focal application of glutamate following pairings of parallel and climbing fiber stimulation added support to a suggested postsynaptic locus of the PSD effect.
4.
The application of aniracetam potentiated EPSP peak amplitude by 40%, but these values returned to baseline as a result of pairings.
With the removal of aniracetam from the bath 20 min after pairings, normal levels of pairing-specific EPSP depression were observed, indicating that the effect did not result from direct desensitization of alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole-proprionic acid (AMPA) receptors.
5.
Incubation of slices in the protein kinase inhibitor H-7 potentiated EPSP peak amplitudes slightly (9%), but peak amplitudes returned to baseline levels after pairings.
The net reduction in EPSP peak amplitude of &lt; 10% after pairings suggested that H-7 partially blocked PSD and that, in turn, PSD involved protein kinases.
6.
The means of induction and the specificity of those means suggest that the phenomenology of PSD is fundamentally different from that of long-term depression.
PSD only occurs with pairings of trains of parallel fiber and climbing fiber stimulation; it occurs without the need for bicuculline; and it can overcome the blocking effects of aniracetam.
7.
Nevertheless, the involvement of protein kinases and the potential role of calcium suggest that the mechanisms involved in the induction of PSD and long-term depression have a number of features in common.
8.
Because of the pairing-specific nature of the long-term synaptic depression observed in these experiments, PSD provides a mechanism that may contribute to the role of the cerebellar cortex in classical conditioning.
</jats:p>
Nociceptin/orphanin FQ (N/OFQ) inhibits excitatory and inhibitory synaptic signaling in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN) 1. Neuroscience. 2005;132(4):955-65. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.11.057.

Nociceptin/orphanin FQ (N/OFQ) inhibits excitatory and inhibitory synaptic 
signaling in the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN).

Gompf HS(1)
 Moldavan MG, Irwin RP, Allen CN.
Author information:
(1)Center for Research on Occupational and Environmental Toxicology, Oregon 
Health and Science University, Portland, 97239-3098, USA.
Environmental synchronization of the endogenous mammalian circadian rhythm 
involves glutamatergic and GABAergic neurotransmission within the hypothalamic 
suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN).
The neuropeptide nociceptin/orphanin FQ (N/OFQ) 
inhibits light-induced phase shifts, evokes K(+)-currents and reduces the 
intracellular Ca(2+) concentration in SCN neurons.
Since these effects are 
consistent with a modulatory role for N/OFQ on synaptic transmission in the SCN, 
we examined the effects of N/OFQ on evoked and spontaneous excitatory and 
inhibitory currents in the SCN.
N/OFQ produced a consistent 
concentration-dependent inhibition of glutamate-mediated excitatory postsynaptic 
currents (EPSC) evoked by optic nerve stimulation.
N/OFQ did not alter the 
amplitude of currents induced by application of 
(RS)-alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) or 
N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) nor the amplitude of miniature EPSC (mEPSC) 
consistent with a lack of N/OFQ effect on postsynaptic AMPA or NMDA receptors.
N/OFQ significantly reduced the mEPSC frequency.
The inhibitory actions of N/OFQ 
were blocked by omega-conotoxin GVIA, an N-type Ca(2+)channel antagonist and 
partially blocked by omega-agatoxin TK, a P/Q type Ca(2+) channel blocker.
These 
data indicate that N/OFQ reduces evoked EPSC, in part, by inhibiting the 
activity of N- and P/Q-type Ca(2+) channels.
In addition, N/OFQ produced a 
consistent reduction in baseline Ca(2+) levels in presynaptic retinohypothalamic 
tract terminals.
N/OFQ also inhibited evoked GABA(A) receptor-mediated 
inhibitory postsynaptic currents (IPSC) in a concentration dependent manner.
However, N/OFQ had no effect on currents activated by muscimol application or on 
the amplitude of miniature IPSC (mIPSC) and significantly reduced the mIPSC 
frequency consistent with an inhibition of GABA release downstream from Ca(2+) 
entry.
Finally, N/OFQ inhibited the paired-pulse depression observed in SCN 
GABAergic synapses consistent with a presynaptic mechanism of action.
Together 
these results suggest a widespread modulatory role for N/OFQ on the synaptic 
transmission in the SCN.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2004.11.057
PMID: 15857701 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of ethanol in an open field apparatus: Modification by U50488H and WIN 44441-3 1. Physiol Behav. 1989 Feb;45(2):273-87. doi: 10.1016/0031-9384(89)90129-7.

Effects of ethanol in an open field apparatus: modification by U50488H and WIN 
44441-3.

Pohorecky LA(1)
 Patel V, Roberts P.

Author information:
(1)Center for Alcohol Studies, Rutgers University, Piscataway, NJ 08854.
The effects of U50488H, a kappa agonist, and WIN 44441-3, a kappa antagonist, 
and their modification of the effects of ethanol, on the behavior of rats in a 
modified open field apparatus, was examined.
Crossover activity was increased by 
U50488H.
Headpoke activity was decreased by WIN 44441-3 and increased by 
U50488H.
Rearing activity was increased by WIN 44441-3 but was not affected by 
U50488H.
The effect of both drugs was dose related, with the largest doses 
having no effect.
Ethanol (0.5 g/kg) stimulated crossover activity while it 
depressed rearing, headpoke and corner activities; except for crossover activity 
the 2.0 g/kg dose of ethanol depressed these activities.
Pretreatment with WIN 
44441-3 (0.5 mg/kg) potentiated the stimulant effect of ethanol on crossover 
activity and partially reversed the depressant effect of ethanol on rearing and 
headpoke activities.
U50488H potentiated the ethanol-induced depression of 
headpoke and reversed the depression of corner activity.
Pretreatment with 
U50488H had no effect on ethanol's action on crossover and rearing behaviors.
Our results indicate that kappa opiate receptors may mediate some behaviors 
exhibited by rats in a modified open field apparatus.
Activation of these 
receptors increases locomotor and headpoke activity but had no effect on rearing 
activity.
Furthermore, the 0.5 g/kg dose of ethanol has differential effects on 
different measures of open field behavior, while the 2.0 g/kg dose was largely 
depressant.
Our data suggest that some of these effects of ethanol may be 
mediated via kappa opioid receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/0031-9384(89)90129-7
PMID: 2547220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of chloride transport inhibition and chloride substitution on neuron function and on hypoxic spreading-depression-like depolarization in rat hippocampal slices 1. Neuroscience. 2000;97(1):33-45. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(00)00025-7.

Effects of chloride transport inhibition and chloride substitution on neuron 
function and on hypoxic spreading-depression-like depolarization in rat 
hippocampal slices.

Müller M(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Cell Biology
 Box 3709, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, 
NC, USA.
mike@neuro-physiol.med.uni-goettingen.de

Chloride fluxes play a crucial role in synaptic inhibition, cell pH regulation, 
as well as in cell volume control.
In many neuropathological processes, cell 
swelling is a pivotal parameter, since cell volume changes and the dimension of 
the interstitial space critically modulate synchronized neuronal activity as 
well as the tissue's susceptibility to seizures or spreading depression.
This 
study therefore focuses on the effects of different Cl(-) transport inhibitors 
and Cl(-) substitution on neuronal function and hypoxia-induced changes in rat 
hippocampal tissue slices.
Orthodromically evoked focal excitatory postsynaptic 
potentials were depressed by furosemide (2mM), 4,4'-diisothiocyanatostilbene-2, 
2'-disulfonic acid (1mM) and Cl(-) substitution by methylsulfate, but were 
enhanced by 4,4'-dinitrostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid (1mM).
All four treatments 
induced multiple population spike firing in response to single orthodromic 
volleys, suggesting reduced synaptic inhibition.
Antidromic population spikes 
increased following Cl(-) withdrawal, were unaffected in the presence of 
furosemide and 4, 4'-dinitrostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid, but were abolished by 
4, 4'-diisothiocyanatostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid.
The amplitude of the 
hypoxic spreading-depression-like extracellular potential shift was reduced by 
furosemide, 4,4'-diisothiocyanatostilbene-2, 2'-disulfonic acid and Cl(-) 
withdrawal, i.e.
by the same treatments that depressed orthodromically evoked 
postsynaptic potentials.
Furosemide prolonged the time to onset and the duration 
of the spreading-depression-like extracellular potential shift, while 4, 
4'-dinitrostilbene-2,2'-disulfonic acid shortened the time to onset.
Spreading-depression-related cell swelling was recorded as the shrinkage of 
relative interstitial space, which was measured as tetramethylammonium-chloride 
space.
Neither the Cl(-) transport inhibitors nor Cl(-) withdrawal had any 
detectable effect on spreading-depression-related cell swelling.
CA1 pyramidal 
neurons usually hyperpolarized during drug application and their input 
resistance decreased.
Cl(-) withdrawal increased their input resistance and 
caused spontaneous burst firing.
Hypoxia caused the expected 
spreading-depression-like rapid, near complete depolarization of single 
pyramidal neurons and drastically reduced their input resistance.
The three 
Cl(-) transport inhibitors and Cl(-) withdrawal delayed the onset of the hypoxic 
depolarization.
In low Cl(-) solutions, the apparent threshold potential at 
which spreading depression was triggered shifted to more positive membrane 
potentials.
The final voltage of the hypoxic depolarization was, however, not 
affected.
It appears from these results that the reduction in the hypoxic 
spreading-depression-like extracellular potential shifts by Cl(-) transport 
inhibitors is at least partially attributable to desynchronization of 
depolarization, not to decreased depolarization in individual cells.
Other 
contributing factors could be changes in recording conditions, depression of 
swelling-induced amino acid release from glial cells and unspecific side-effects 
of the applied drugs.
Desynchronization could also account for the delayed 
spreading-depression onset.
It is concluded that Cl(-) fluxes play a role in the 
triggering of spreading depression, but the spreading-depression-like 
depolarization itself or its self-regenerative character is not mediated by 
Cl(-).
DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4522(00)00025-7
PMID: 10771337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Discovery of Novel-Scaffold Monoamine Transporter Ligands via in Silico Screening with the S1 Pocket of the Serotonin Transporter 1. ACS Chem Neurosci. 2014 Sep 17;5(9):784-92. doi: 10.1021/cn500133b. Epub 2014 
Jul 15.

Discovery of novel-scaffold monoamine transporter ligands via in silico 
screening with the S1 pocket of the serotonin transporter.

Nolan TL(1)
 Geffert LM, Kolber BJ, Madura JD, Surratt CK.
Author information:
(1)Division of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Mylan School of Pharmacy, ‡Departments 
of Chemistry and Biochemistry, Center for Computational Sciences, and 
§Department of Biological Sciences, Duquesne University , 600 Forbes Avenue, 
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania 15282, United States.
Discovery of new inhibitors of the plasmalemmal monoamine transporters (MATs) 
continues to provide pharmacotherapeutic options for depression, addiction, 
attention deficit disorders, psychosis, narcolepsy, and Parkinson's disease.
The 
windfall of high-resolution MAT structural information afforded by X-ray 
crystallography has enabled the construction of credible computational models.
Elucidation of lead compounds, creation of compound structure-activity series, 
and pharmacologic testing are staggering expenses that could be reduced by using 
a MAT computational model for virtual screening (VS) of structural libraries 
containing millions of compounds.
Here, VS of the PubChem small molecule 
structural database using the S1 (primary substrate) ligand pocket of a 
serotonin transporter homology model yielded 19 prominent "hit" compounds.
In 
vitro pharmacology of these VS hits revealed four structurally unique MAT 
substrate uptake inhibitors with high nanomolar affinity at one or more of the 
three MATs.
In vivo characterization of three of these hits revealed significant 
activity in a mouse model of acute depression at doses that did not elicit 
untoward locomotor effects.
This constitutes the first report of MAT inhibitor 
discovery using exclusively the primary substrate pocket as a VS tool.
Novel-scaffold MAT inhibitors offer hope of new medications that lack the many 
classic adverse effects of existing antidepressant drugs.
DOI: 10.1021/cn500133b
PMCID: PMC4176318
PMID: 25003748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Panels
 Mini-Panels and Study Groups 1.
Neuropsychopharmacology.
2015 Dec;40 Suppl 1(Suppl 1):S1-S105.
doi: 
10.1038/npp.2015.324.
Panels, Mini-Panels and Study GroupsMonday, December 7, 2015.
[No authors listed]

DOI: 10.1038/npp.2015.324
PMCID: PMC4672309
PMID: 26632285
Action of some antibiotics on the extra-hepatic biliary tract. 8. Gentamicin. 1. Arch Int Pharmacodyn Ther. 1970 Nov;188(1):137-44.

Action of some antibiotics on the extra-hepatic biliary tract. 8. Gentamicin.

Benzi G
 Bertè F, Arrigoni E, Sanguinetti L.

PMID: 5485094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Serotonin Induces Long-Term Depression at Corticostriatal Synapses <jats:p>The striatum has important roles in motor control and action learning and
 like many brain regions, receives multiple monoaminergic inputs.
We have examined serotonergic modulation of rat and mouse corticostriatal neurotransmission and find that serotonin (5-HT) activates 5-HT<jats:sub>1b</jats:sub>receptors resulting in a long-term depression (LTD) of glutamate release and striatal output that we have termed 5-HT–LTD.
5-HT–LTD is presynaptically mediated, cAMP pathway dependent, and inducible by endogenous striatal 5-HT, as revealed by application of a selective 5-HT reuptake inhibitor.
5-HT–LTD is mutually occlusive with dopamine/endocannabinoid-dependent LTD, suggesting that these two forms of LTD act on the same corticostriatal terminals.
Thus, serotonergic and dopaminergic mechanisms exist that may interact to persistently sculpt corticostriatal circuits, potentially influencing action learning and striatal-based disorders.</jats:p>
Endogenous opiods may mediate post-ictal behavioral depression in amygdaloid-kindled rats 1. Brain Res. 1979 May 11;167(2):435-40. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(79)90842-4.

Endogenous opioids may mediate post-ictal behavioral depression in 
amygdaloid-kindled rats.

Frenk H
 Engel J Jr, Ackermann RF, Shavit Y, Liebeskind JC.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(79)90842-4
PMID: 221069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Structural and Functional Small Fiber Abnormalities in the Neuropathic Postural Tachycardia Syndrome 1. PLoS One. 2013 Dec 27;8(12):e84716. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084716. 
eCollection 2013.

Structural and functional small fiber abnormalities in the neuropathic postural 
tachycardia syndrome.

Gibbons CH(1)
 Bonyhay I(1), Benson A(1), Wang N(1), Freeman R(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Beth Israel Deaconess Medical Center, Harvard 
Medical School, Boston, Massachusetts, United States of America.
OBJECTIVE: To define the neuropathology, clinical phenotype, autonomic 
physiology and differentiating features in individuals with neuropathic and 
non-neuropathic postural tachycardia syndrome (POTS).
METHODS: Twenty-four subjects with POTS and 10 healthy control subjects had skin 
biopsy analysis of intra-epidermal nerve fiber density (IENFD), quantitative 
sensory testing (QST) and autonomic testing.
Subjects completed quality of life, 
fatigue and disability questionnaires.
Subjects were divided into neuropathic 
and non-neuropathic POTS, defined by abnormal IENFD and abnormal small fiber and 
sudomotor function.
RESULTS: Nine of 24 subjects had neuropathic POTS and had significantly lower 
resting and tilted heart rates; reduced parasympathetic function; and lower 
phase 4 valsalva maneuver overshoot compared with those with non-neuropathic 
POTS (P<0.05).
Neuropathic POTS subjects also had less anxiety and depression 
and greater overall self-perceived health-related quality of life scores than 
non-neuropathic POTS subjects.
A sub-group of POTS patients (cholinergic POTS) 
had abnormal proximal sudomotor function and symptoms that suggest 
gastrointestinal and genitourinary parasympathetic nervous system dysfunction.
CONCLUSIONS AND RELEVANCE: POTS subtypes may be distinguished using small fiber 
and autonomic structural and functional criteria.
Patients with non-neuropathic 
POTS have greater anxiety, greater depression and lower health-related quality 
of life scores compared to those with neuropathic POTS.
These findings suggest 
different pathophysiological processes underlie the postural tachycardia in 
neuropathic and non-neuropathic POTS patients.
The findings have implications 
for the therapeutic interventions to treat this disorder.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0084716
PMCID: PMC3874039
PMID: 24386408 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Antipsychotics possessing antidepressive efficacy increase Golf protein in rat striatum 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 2008 Dec;201(2):229-35. doi: 
10.1007/s00213-008-1264-y. Epub 2008 Sep 6.

Antipsychotics possessing antidepressive efficacy increase Golf protein in rat 
striatum.

Taoka H(1)
 Hamamura T, Endo S, Miyata S, Toma K, Ishihara T, Kuroda S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Okayama University Graduate School of 
Medicine, Dentistry and Pharmaceutical Sciences, and Okayama Red Cross General 
Hospital, 2-5-1 Shikata-cho, Okayama, 700-8558, Japan.
INTRODUCTION: Recently, second-generation antipsychotics (SGAs) have been widely 
used in the treatment of mood disorders.
However, the mechanisms of the 
antidepressant effect of SGAs remain unclear.
We proposed that Golf protein, a 
stimulant alpha-subunit of G protein coupled with the dopamine D1 receptor, 
might a play the key role in the antidepressive effect of antidepressants.
To 
clarify the relationship between Golf protein and the antidepressive effects of 
antipsychotics, we examined the effects of chronic treatment with several 
antipsychotics on the level of Golf protein in the rat striatum.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Male Wistar rats were treated with one of several 
antipsychotics for 2 weeks: olanzapine (2, 5, or 10 mg/kg), sulpiride (5, 10, or 
50 mg/kg), amisulpride (3, 10, or 20 mg/kg), risperidone (0.2 or 2 mg/kg), 
haloperidol (0.3 or 3 mg/kg), or clozapine (2 or 10 mg/kg).
RESULTS AND DISCUSSION: Olanzapine (5 mg/kg), sulpiride (5, or 10 mg/kg), and 
amisulpride (10 mg/kg) treatments significantly increased the level of Golf 
protein, but there was no increase with administration of higher doses of these 
three antipsychotics.
Risperidone, haloperidol, and clozapine treatment did not 
change the level of Golf protein at any dose.
In this study, all antipsychotics 
that have antidepressive effects increased Golf protein.
This suggests that an 
increase in Golf may play an important role in the antidepressive effect of 
antipsychotics.
CONCLUSION: We postulate that the increase in Golf protein levels result in an 
increase the proportion of D1 receptors in the high-affinity state and that 
augmentation of the dopaminergic system exerts the antidepressant effect.
DOI: 10.1007/s00213-008-1264-y
PMID: 18777019 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Alaproclate
 a new selective 5-HT uptake inhibitor with therapeutic potential in depression and senile dementia 1.
J Neural Transm.
1984;59(4):265-88. doi: 10.1007/BF01255596.
Alaproclate, a new selective 5-HT uptake inhibitor with therapeutic potential in 
depression and senile dementia.
Ogren SO, Holm AC, Hall H, Lindberg UH.
Alaproclate, a new specific 5-HT uptake inhibitor, was examined for its action 
on several receptors in the brain, for its action on the NA, DA and 5-HT uptake 
mechanisms in vivo and for its action on brain biogenic amine content.
Alaproclate was practically devoid of action on a number of receptors as 
examined in binding studies in vitro: 5-HT, histamine-H1, alpha 1, -alpha 
2-adrenergic and dopamine D2 receptors.
Alaproclate had also a weak affinity for 
3H-norzimeldine binding sites in contrast to imipramine.
Unlike the tricyclic 
antidepressants alaproclate had a negligible action on muscarinic receptors and 
failed to block muscarinic induced stimulation in vivo.
Contrary to clomipramine 
alaproclate failed to block NA uptake in vivo.
Alaproclate was found to display 
a regional selectivity in blocking 5-HT uptake in vivo (measured with the H 
75/12-method).
The compound was most potent in the hippocampus and hypothalamus 
followed by striatum and cerebral cortex with a low potency in the spinal cord.
The results are discussed in relation to a previously presented carrier site 
model for serotonin reuptake.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01255596
PMID: 6205120 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Preparation and evaluation of ethyl [18F]fluoroacetate as a proradiotracer of [18F]fluoroacetate for the measurement of glial metabolism by PET 1. Nucl Med Biol. 2009 Feb;36(2):155-62. doi: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2008.11.006.

Preparation and evaluation of ethyl [(18)F]fluoroacetate as a proradiotracer of 
[(18)F]fluoroacetate for the measurement of glial metabolism by PET.

Mori T(1)
 Sun LQ, Kobayashi M, Kiyono Y, Okazawa H, Furukawa T, Kawashima H, 
Welch MJ, Fujibayashi Y.
Author information:
(1)Biomedical Imaging Research Center, University of Fukui, Fukui 910-1193, 
Japan.
INTRODUCTION: Changes in glial metabolism in brain ischemia, Alzheimer's 
disease, depression, schizophrenia, epilepsy and manganese neurotoxicity have 
been reported in recent studies.
Therefore, it is very important to measure 
glial metabolism in vivo for the elucidation and diagnosis of these diseases.
Radiolabeled acetate is a good candidate for this purpose, but acetate has 
little uptake in the brain due to its low lipophilicity.
We have designed a new 
proradiotracer, ethyl [(18)F]fluoroacetate ([(18)F]EFA), which is 
[(18)F]fluoroacetate ([(18)F]FA) esterified with ethanol, to increase the 
lipophilicity of fluoroacetate (FA), allowing the measurement of glial 
metabolism.
METHODS: The synthesis of [(18)F]EFA was achieved using ethyl O-mesyl-glycolate 
as precursor.
The blood-brain barrier permeability of ethyl 
[1-(14)C]fluoroacetate ([(14)C]EFA) was estimated by a brain uptake index (BUI) 
method.
Hydrolysis of [(14)C]EFA in the brain was calculated by the fraction of 
radioactivity in lipophilic and water fractions of homogenized brain.
Using the 
plasma of five animal species, the stability of [(14)C]EFA was measured.
Biodistribution studies of [(18)F]EFA in ddY mice were carried out and compared 
with [(18)F]FA.
Positron emission tomography (PET) scanning using common 
marmosets was performed for 90 min postadministration.
At 60 min postinjection 
of [(18)F]EFA, metabolite studies were performed.
Organs were dissected from the 
marmosets, and extracted metabolites were analyzed with a thin-layer 
chromatography method.
RESULTS: The synthesis of [(18)F]EFA was accomplished in a short time (29 min) 
and with a reproducible radiochemical yield of 28.6+/-3.6% (decay corrected) and 
a high radiochemical purity of more than 95%.
In the brain permeability study, 
the BUI of [(14)C]EFA was 3.8 times higher than that of sodium 
[1-(14)C]fluoroacetate.
[(14)C]EFA was hydrolyzed rapidly in rat brains.
In 
stability studies using the plasma of five animal species, [(14)C]EFA was stable 
only in primate plasma.
Biodistribution studies in mice showed that the uptake 
of [(18)F]EFA in selected organs was higher than that of [(18)F]FA.
From 
nonprimate PET studies, [(18)F]EFA was initially taken into the brain after 
injection.
Metabolites related to the tricarboxylic acid (TCA) cycle were 
detected in common marmoset brain.
CONCLUSION: [(18)F]EFA rapidly enters the brain and is then converted into TCA 
cycle metabolites in the brains of common marmosets.
[(18)F]EFA shows promise as 
a proradiotracer for the measurement of glial metabolism.
DOI: 10.1016/j.nucmedbio.2008.11.006
PMID: 19217527 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A proposed mechanism(s) of transitory ischemic injury to myocardium. 1. Am J Vet Res. 1979 Feb;40(2):170-82.

A proposed mechanism(s) of transitory ischemic injury to myocardium.

Schneider MD
 Kelman BJ.
The main objective of this study was to produce primary acute ischemic injury to 
myocardium in a live animal.
In vitro, guinea pig platelets were sensitive to 
perturbation and aggregation by a suspension of ultrafine fibrillary collagen 
material isolated from the aorta of an aged burro (Equus asinus).
The platelets 
responded to the stimulatory action of this material down to 100 to 200 ng (dry 
weight) added to 0.45 ml of platelet-rich plasma, as determined by aggregometric 
technique.
Aortic fibrillary collagen material injected IV into guinea pigs (350 
to 1900 microgram protein/kg of weight) produced a transitory disappearance of 
virtually all circulating platelets within 5 minutes.
In animals in which blood 
samples were taken 2.5 hours after injection, 50 to 75% of the average base-line 
platelets in the circulation of controls returned to the circulation.
In other 
experiments, 3 anesthetized animals were injected by jugular vein with an amount 
of active fibrillary collagen material (300 microgram as protein/kg of animal 
weight) estimated to produce reversible platelet aggregation in vivo.
Two 
control animals were injected with the same dose of the material that had been 
inactivated (15 minutes at 100 C) to abolish platelet aggregation.
Treated and 
control animals were maintained under general anesthesia for 2.5 hours.
Intraventricular pressures and electrocardiographs (ECG) were monitored 
continuously for the first 30 minutes.
The injection of the active fibrillary 
collagen material caused a large ventricular pressure elevation (170/10, 180/10, 
and 150/10 mm of Hg) in approximately 40 s. Preinfusion ventricular pressures in 
the 3 animals were 65/0, 85/5, and 88/0 mm of Hg, respectively.
Within 60 s, 
there was a reduction in the absolute platelet number in the peripheral 
circulation.
The elevation of ventricular pressure persisted for approximately 5 
minutes and was followed within 30 minutes by a set of ECG events suggestive of 
acute myocardial ischemic injury, which included premature ventricular 
contractions, transient S-T segment depression concurrent with ventricular 
hypertension, and S-T segment elevation with reversed tall upright T-waves in 
association with a decrease to the preinfusion ventricular base line.
Other ECG 
changes included prolongation of the P-R segment, missed ventricular 
contractions, and arrhythmia.
The ECG changes seemed to be subsequent to 
platelet microthrombus formation in the pulmonary arterial microcirculation.
By 
2.5 hours after the treatment, platelets "rebounded" into the circulation in 2 
surviving guinea pigs, and left ventricular pressures and ECG profiles returned 
to the preinfusion base lines.
Guinea pigs IV infused with similar amounts of 
inactivated (15 minutes at 100 C) fibrillary collagen material did not show 
changes.
PMID: 464353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dopamine receptor D5 deficiency results in a selective reduction of hippocampal NMDA receptor subunit NR2B expression and impaired memory 1. Neuropharmacology. 2016 Apr;103:222-35. doi: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.12.018.
 Epub 2015 Dec 20.

Dopamine receptor D5 deficiency results in a selective reduction of hippocampal 
NMDA receptor subunit NR2B expression and impaired memory.

Moraga-Amaro R(1)
 González H(2), Ugalde V(2), Donoso-Ramos JP(1), 
Quintana-Donoso D(1), Lara M(3), Morales B(3), Rojas P(3), Pacheco R(4), 
Stehberg J(5).
Author information:
(1)Laboratorio de Neurobiología, Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas, 
Universidad Andres Bello, 8370146, Santiago, Chile.
(2)Laboratorio de Neuroinmunología, Fundación Ciencia & Vida, Ñuñoa, 7780272, 
Santiago, Chile.
(3)Laboratorio de Neurociencias, Departamento de Biología, Facultad de Química y 
Biología, Universidad de Santiago de Chile, 9170022, Santiago, Chile.
(4)Laboratorio de Neuroinmunología, Fundación Ciencia & Vida, Ñuñoa, 7780272, 
Santiago, Chile; Laboratorio de Neuroinmunología, Departamento de Ciencias 
Biológicas, Facultad de Ciencias Biológicas, Universidad Andres Bello, 8370146, 
Santiago, Chile.
Electronic address: rpacheco@cienciavida.org.
(5)Laboratorio de Neurobiología, Centro de Investigaciones Biomédicas, 
Universidad Andres Bello, 8370146, Santiago, Chile.
Electronic address: 
jstehberg@unab.cl.
Pharmacological evidence associates type I dopamine receptors, including 
subtypes D1 and D5, with learning and memory.
Analyses using genetic approaches 
have determined the relative contribution of dopamine receptor D1 (D1R) in 
cognitive tasks.
However, the lack of drugs that can discriminate between D1R 
and D5R has made the pharmacological distinction between the two receptors 
difficult.
Here, we aimed to determine the role of D5R in learning and memory.
In this study we tested D5R knockout mice and wild-type littermates in a battery 
of behavioral tests, including memory, attention, locomotion, anxiety and 
motivational evaluations.
Our results show that genetic deficiency of D5R 
significantly impairs performance in the Morris water maze paradigm, object 
location and object recognition memory, indicating a relevant role for D5R in 
spatial memory and recognition memory.
Moreover, the lack of D5R resulted in 
decreased exploration and locomotion.
In contrast, D5R deficiency had no impact 
on working memory, anxiety and depressive-like behavior, measured using the 
spontaneous alternation, open-field, tail suspension test, and forced swimming 
test.
Electrophysiological analyses performed on hippocampal slices showed 
impairment in long-term-potentiation in mice lacking D5R.
Further analyses at 
the molecular level showed that genetic deficiency of D5R results in a strong 
and selective reduction in the expression of the NMDA receptor subunit NR2B in 
the hippocampus.
These findings demonstrate the relevant contribution of D5R in 
memory and suggest a functional interaction of D5R with hippocampal 
glutamatergic pathways.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2015.12.018
PMID: 26714288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sporadic Creutzfeldt Jakob disease in two adolescents 1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2008 Jan;79(1):14-8. doi: 
10.1136/jnnp.2006.104570. Epub 2007 May 23.

Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease in two adolescents.

Murray K(1)
 Ritchie DL, Bruce M, Young CA, Doran M, Ironside JW, Will RG.
Author information:
(1)National Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease Surveillance Unit, School of Molecular and 
Clinical Medicine, University of Edinburgh, Western General Hospital, Edinburgh 
EH4 2 XU, UK.
BACKGROUND: Sporadic Creutzfeldt-Jakob disease (CJD) is a condition 
predominantly affecting older age groups, with cases aged less than 45 years 
rare and an age at onset or death of less than 20 years exceptional.
METHODS: Data from the systematic study of sporadic CJD in the UK are available 
from 1970 onwards.
Clinical and pathological data are reviewed in order to 
identify atypical cases, including those at the extremes of the age range of 
sporadic CJD.
Detailed analysis of atypical cases is undertaken, and in selected 
cases laboratory transmission studies are carried out in order to provide 
information on the characteristics of the infectious agent.
RESULTS: In the UK, two cases of sporadic CJD in adolescents have been 
identified, dying at ages 16 and 20 years.
The first case predated the epidemic 
of bovine spongiform encephalopathy and the characteristics of the second case, 
including laboratory transmission studies, are consistent with a diagnosis of 
sporadic rather than variant CJD.
CONCLUSION: The cases in this report indicate that sporadic CJD can develop at a 
very young age, that variant CJD is not the only form of CJD occurring in this 
age group and that neuropathological examination is essential for accurate 
diagnosis of human prion disease.
DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.2006.104570
PMID: 17522102 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Changes in the complex permittivity during spreading depression in rat cortex 1. IEEE Trans Biomed Eng. 1999 Nov;46(11):1330-8. doi: 10.1109/10.797993.

Changes in the complex permittivity during spreading depression in rat cortex.

Yoon RS(1)
 Czaya A, Kwan HC, Joy ML.
Author information:
(1)Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Toronto, 
Ont., Canada.
ryoon@ecf.utoronto.ca

With recent developments in current density imaging (CDI), it is feasible to 
utilize this new technique in brain imaging applications.
Since CDI's ability to 
measure changes in current density depends on a concomitant activity-dependent 
change in the conductivity of the brain tissue, we have examined the changes in 
complex conductivity during spreading depression (SD) in rodent neocortex using 
a coaxial probe.
SD was chosen because it is often referred to as an animal 
model of cerebral ischemia and migraine with aura.
The conductivity measurements 
revealed a change with short latency (30-60 s) followed by a change with a 
longer latency (200-300 s).
This change in conductivity with short latency has 
not been reported before, and we conjecture that it may be the priming or 
triggering mechanism prior to the main SD episode.
A 20% change in conductivity 
during SD is sufficiently large to be measured by CDI.
Therefore, the ability to 
measure changes in the conductivity, as opposed to metabolic changes, makes CDI 
a viable approach to the study of ischemia and migraine with aura.
DOI: 10.1109/10.797993
PMID: 10582418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effects of intravenous acetylcholine on the cardiovascular system of the anaesthetized dog. 1. Br J Pharmacol. 1970 Feb;38(2):448P-449P.

The effects of intravenous acetylcholine on the cardiovascular system of the 
anaesthetized dog.

Eble JN.

PMCID: PMC1702804
PMID: 5417876 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Antihypertensive Medication on the Cardiovascular Response to Ketamine in Rats <jats:p>The effects of hydralazine
 clonidine, propranolol and methyldopa medications on the cardiovascular response to ketamine anaesthesia were studied in spontaneously hypertensive (SH) rats.
Except in propranolol‐ and methyldopa‐treated animals, blood pressure was increased by ketamine in all groups.
The heart rate was increased only in the normotensive control rats, whereas it was reduced in both the unmedicated and all of the medicated SH rats.
Plasma renin activity under ketamine anaesthesia was markedly higher in normotensive control rats than in any of the SH groups.
The pressor responses to dopamine and metaraminol were not altered by propranolol medication, but hydralazine suppressed these responses, while they were markedly intensified by clonidine and methyldopa treatment.
Similarly, small additional doses of ketamine caused a pressor response only in clonidine‐ and methyldopa‐treated animals, whereas in the other groups the response was depressive.
The tolerance to haemorrhagic shock during ketamine anaesthesia was notably improved by hydralazine and methyldopa medication, but impaired by propranolol treatment.</jats:p><jats:p>The results suggest that, with special reference to shock tolerance, hydralazine and methyldopa, and to a lesser extent also clonidine, have a favourable effect on the circulation under ketamine anaesthesia, whereas the action of beta‐blockade may be harmful.</jats:p>
Melatonin synergizes with citalopram to induce antidepressant‐like behavior and to promote hippocampal neurogenesis in adult mice <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Adult hippocampal neurogenesis is affected in some neuropsychiatric disorders such as depression. Numerous evidence indicates that plasma levels of melatonin are decreased in depressed patients. Also
 melatonin exerts positive effects on the hippocampal neurogenic process and on depressive‐like behavior.
In addition, antidepressants revert alterations of hippocampal neurogenesis present in models of depression following a similar time course to the improvement of behavior.
In this study, we analyzed the effects of both, citalopram, a widely used antidepressant, and melatonin in the Porsolt forced swim test.
In addition, we investigated the potential antidepressant role of the combination of melatonin and citalopram (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MLTCITAL</jats:styled-content>), its type of pharmacological interaction on depressive behavior, and its effect on hippocampal neurogenesis.
Here, we found decreased immobility behavior in mice treated with melatonin (&lt;14–33%) and citalopram (&lt;17–30%).
Additionally, the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MLTCITAL</jats:styled-content> combination also decreased immobility (&lt;22–35%) in comparison with control mice, reflecting an antidepressant‐like effect after 14 days of treatment.
Moreover, <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MLTCITAL</jats:styled-content> decreased plasma corticosterone levels (≤13%) and increased cell proliferation (&gt;29%), survival (&gt;39%), and the absolute number of ‐associated new neurons (&gt;53%) in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus.
These results indicate that the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MLTCITAL</jats:styled-content> combination exerts synergism to induce an antidepressant‐like action that could be related to the modulation of adult hippocampal neurogenesis.
This outcome opens the opportunity of using melatonin to promote behavioral benefits and hippocampal neurogenesis in depression and also supports the use of the <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">MLTCITAL</jats:styled-content> combination as an alternative to treat depression.</jats:p>
Influence of an extracellular acidosis on excitatory synaptic transmission and long-term potentiation in the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices 1. J Neurosci Res. 2000 Nov 1;62(3):403-15. doi: 
10.1002/1097-4547(20001101)62:3<403::AID-JNR11>3.0.CO;2-3.

Influence of an extracellular acidosis on excitatory synaptic transmission and 
long-term potentiation in the CA1 region of rat hippocampal slices.

Hsu KS(1)
 Liang YC, Huang CC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, College of Medicine, National Cheng-Kung 
University, Tainan City, Taiwan.
richard@mail.ncku.edu.tw

The effects of extracellular acidification on the synaptic function and neuronal 
excitability were investigated on the hippocampal CA1 neurons.
A decrease of 
extracellular pH from 7.4 to 6.7 did not alter either the resting membrane 
potential or the neuronal membrane input resistance.
Extracellularly recorded 
field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) and population spikes (PSs) 
were significantly reduced by acidosis.
Additionally, the amplitude of 
presynaptic fiber volley was also reduced.
The sensitivity of postsynaptic 
neurons to N-methyl-D-aspartate, but not to 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methylisoxazole-4-propionic acid, was depressed by 
acidosis.
Lowering of extracellular pH did not significantly affect the 
magnitude of paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) of synaptic transmission.
Acidosis 
also reversibly limited the sustained repetitive firing (RF) of Na(+)-dependent 
action potentials elicited by injection of depolarizing current pulses into the 
pyramidal cells.
The limitation of RF by extracellular acidification was 
accompanied by the reduction of the maximal rate of rise (;V(max)) of the action 
potentials and the amplitude of afterhyperpolarization.
Neither the Na (+)/H (+) 
antiporter blocker 5-(N -ethyl -N -isopropyl)-amiloride nor the selective 
adenosine A (1) receptor antagonist 1,3-dipropyl -8-cyclopentylxanthine, 
however, affected the acidosis -induced synaptic depression.
It was also found 
that acidosis did not affect either the induction r maintenance of long -term 
potentiation (LTP) at Schaffer collateral -CA 1 synapses.
These results suggest 
that the extracellular acidosis -induced synaptic depression is likely to result 
from an inhibition of presynaptic Na (+) conductance, thereby decreasing the 
amplitude of action potentials in individual afferent fibers or the number of 
afferent fiber activation to stimuli and then indirectly affecting the signaling 
processes contributing to trigger neurotransmitter release.
Copyright 2000 Wiley-Liss, Inc.

DOI: 10.1002/1097-4547(20001101)62:3<403::AID-JNR11>3.0.CO;2-3
PMID: 11054810 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enhancement of long-term depression by soluble amyloid β protein in rat hippocampus is mediated by metabotropic glutamate receptor and involves activation of p38MAPK
 STEP and caspase-3 1.
Neuroscience.
2013 Dec 3;253:435-43. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.08.054.
Epub 2013 Sep 5.
Enhancement of long-term depression by soluble amyloid β protein in rat 
hippocampus is mediated by metabotropic glutamate receptor and involves 
activation of p38MAPK, STEP and caspase-3.
Chen X(1), Lin R, Chang L, Xu S, Wei X, Zhang J, Wang C, Anwyl R, Wang Q.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Medical School, Research Center of Behavioral 
Science, Ningbo University, Ningbo 315211, China.
It is reported that the amyloid-β protein (Aβ)-induced impairments in synaptic 
plasticity coincide with memory decline and dementia.
Although Aβ-induced 
inhibition of hippocampal long-term potentiation has been intensively 
investigated, the underlying mechanism of Aβ-enhanced long-term depression (LTD) 
is not clear.
Here, we report that acute exposure of rat hippocampal slices to 
soluble Aβ-enhanced LTD induced by weak low-frequency stimulation (wLFS; 1Hz for 
3 min, 180 pulses) in granule cells of the dentate gyrus.
Application of 
LY341495 (a non-selective Group I/II metrabotropic glumate receptor (mGluR) 
antagonist) completely blocked Aβ-enhanced LTD, whereas D-AP5 (a not selective 
N-methyl-d-aspartate receptor (NMDAR) antagonist) had no effect on Aβ-enhanced 
LTD compared with controls.
In addition, Aβ-enhanced LTD was occluded by 
pre-application of 3,5-dihydroxyphenylglycine, a Group1 mGluR (mGluR1/5) 
agonist, suggesting Aβ-enhanced LTD depends on mGluR1/5 but not NMDAR.
We also 
report here that p38 mitogen-activated protein kinase (p38MAPK) inhibitor 
SB203580 and postsynaptic protein tyrosine phosphatase inhibitors phenylarsine 
oxide and sodium orthovanadate prevented the facilitatory effect of Aβ on LTD.
Application of striatal-enriched protein tyrosine phosphatase (STEP) activator 
MG132 facilitated induction of LTD by wLFS, but did not block following 
Aβ-enhanced LTD induced by another wLFS.
On the other hand, Aβ-enhanced LTD 
blocked following MG132-LTD by wLFS, suggesting Aβ-enhanced hippocampal LTD 
involves STEP activation.
Application of either non-selective caspase inhibitor 
Z-VAD-FMK or caspase-3 selective inhibitor Z-DEVD-FMK prevented Aβ-enhanced LTD.
However, neither the tumor necrosis factor-α converting enzyme inhibitor TAPI-2 
nor the mammalian target of rapamycin inhibitor rapamycin prevented the 
enhancement of Aβ on LTD.
Therefore, we conclude that soluble Aβ enhances LTD in 
the hippocampal dentate gyrus region, and the facilitatory effect of Aβ on LTD 
involves mGluR1/5, p38MAPK, STEP and caspase-3 activation.
Copyright © 2013 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2013.08.054
PMID: 24012839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Electroconvulsive Shock Increases Tyrosine Hydroxylase Activity in the Brain and Adrenal Gland of the Rat <jats:p>A single application of electroconvulsive shock produced a rapid but short-lasting increase in tyrosine hydroxylase activity above control values in the rat adrenal medulla and striatum. After repeated electroconvulsive shock treatment (once per day for 7 days)
 tyrosine hydroxylase activity increased significantly in the locus ceruleus, nucleus of the tractus solitarius, hippocampus, cerebellum, and frontal cortex and remained elevated for 4 to 8 days.
Adrenal tyrosine hydroxylase activity increased 1 day after the termination of repeated electroconvulsive shock treatments and remained elevated for at least 24 days, possibly reflecting the establishment of a new and higher steady-state level of catecholamine biosynthesis in the adrenal.
These findings suggest that the persistent changes in tyrosine hydroxylase activity produced by repeated electroconvulsive shock may be a factor contributing to the long-lasting antidepressant effects of this treatment.</jats:p>
Cardiovascular effect of intravenous lipid A in rabbits. 1. Circ Shock. 1987;23(4):285-93.

Cardiovascular effect of intravenous lipid A in rabbits.

Ali KH(1)
 Feeley TW, Bieber M, McGrath B, Teng NN.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Stanford University School of Medicine, California 
94305.
The in vivo cardiovascular effect of intravenous administration of 
monophosphoryl lipid A (mp-lipid A) and diphosphoryl lipid A (dp-lipid A) in 
awake New Zealand white rabbits was investigated.
Observed changes were 
evaluated in comparison to a control group and an endotoxin-treated group.
Rabbits given lipid A showed a significant depression in cardiac index (p less 
than .025), mean arterial pressure (p less than .025, dp-lipid A only), arterial 
carbon dioxide tension (p less than .025), and total leukocyte count (p less 
than .05) compared to controls.
Animals receiving lipid A tended to respond 
overall in a manner closely matching that of the endotoxin group.
Dosages of 
lipid A given were approximately 3.5 times larger than the endotoxin dosages 
with respect to actual number of molecules administered (1.25-2.0 times larger 
by mass).
These results indicate that lipid A is active in producing the 
cardiovascular and leukopenic effects characteristic of experimental septic 
shock.
PMID: 3690820 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Neomycin and ruthenium red antagonism of monoaminergic depression of cerebral cortical neurones 1. Life Sci. 1974 Jul 15;15(2):213-22. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(74)90209-4.

Neomycin and ruthenium red antagonism of monoaminergic depression of cerebral 
cortical neurones.

Phillis JW.

DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(74)90209-4
PMID: 4549912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of ionic strength on the RNA polymerase activities of isolated nuclei and nucleoli of rat liver 1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1971 Feb;142(2):489-500. doi: 
10.1016/0003-9861(71)90512-1.

Effects of ionic strength on the RNA polymerase activities of isolated nuclei 
and nucleoli of rat liver.

Johnson JD
 Jant BA, Kaufman S, Sokoloff L.

DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(71)90512-1
PMID: 5550156 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Protamine cardiotoxicity and nitric oxide 1. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 2001 Jul;20(1):147-52. doi: 
10.1016/s1010-7940(01)00767-9.

Protamine cardiotoxicity and nitric oxide.

Pevni D(1)
 Frolkis I, Iaina A, Wollman Y, Chernichovski T, Shapira I, Uretzky 
G, Mohr R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiothoracic Surgery, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, 6 
Weizmann Street, Tel Aviv 64239, Israel.
shapiraiz@tasmc.health.gov.il

OBJECTIVES: The purpose of this study is to assess the role of the nitric oxide 
(NO) pathway in protamine-induced cardiotoxicity and to formulate a possible 
explanation for this adverse effect.
METHODS: Isolated rat hearts were perfused by Krebs--Henseleit (KH) solution 
using a modified Langendorff model.
They were randomized into three groups: A, 
40 min perfusion with KH solution; B, 20 min perfusion with KH solution and 20 
min with protamine; C, as B but Ng-monomethyl-L-arginine (L-NMMA), a 
non-selective inhibitor of the NO pathway, was added during 40 min of the 
perfusion period.
Left ventricular (LV) function was measured every 10 min.
NO 
and tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF) were detected in the effluent from the 
coronary sinus (CS) and in the supernatant of the cardiac myocytes culture.
Nitric oxide synthases (NOS) mRNA levels were determined in groups A and B from 
LV samples at baseline and after 40 min of perfusion.
RESULTS: We found that protamine at a dose of 12 microg/ml causes significant 
depression of LV function (decreased peak systolic pressure to 22.5+/-3.2% and 
dP/dt max to 22.9+/-3.1%).
L-NMMA did not prevent protamine cardiotoxicity.
NOS 
mRNA was not detected from LV samples in any group.
The NO in the effluent from 
the CS and from the supernatant of the cardiomyocytes culture was below 
detectable levels.
However, a significant amount of TNF was measured in the 
effluent from the CS (108+/-17 pg/min for group B and 117+/-13 pg/min for group 
C) and in the supernatant of the cardiomyocytes culture (65+/-21 pg/ml).
CONCLUSIONS: This study suggests that direct protamine-induced cardiotoxicity 
does not depend on the NO pathway.
Our finding that protamine induced TNF 
release by cardiomyocytes can shed new light on the understanding of protamine 
cardiotoxicity.
DOI: 10.1016/s1010-7940(01)00767-9
PMID: 11423288 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Respiratory burst capacity of activated macrophages is resistant to depression by erythrocyte phagocytosis 1. Inflammation. 1992 Aug;16(4):285-94. doi: 10.1007/BF00917621.

Respiratory burst capacity of activated macrophages is resistant to depression 
by erythrocyte phagocytosis.

Schwacha MG(1)
 Loegering DJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Albany Medical College, New York 
12208.
The present study evaluated whether macrophage activation would reduce the 
depression in the capacity of macrophages to produce H2O2 following EIgG 
phagocytosis.
Macrophage activation was accomplished by exposing inflammatory 
rat peritoneal macrophages to 10 units of IFN gamma for 72 h. IFN gamma 
treatment caused a four to fivefold increase in phorbol myristate acetate 
(PMA)-triggered H2O2 production, but Fc receptor phagocytic function was 
unaltered.
IFN gamma-activated macrophages were able to phagocytize a greater 
number of EIgG before a decrease in PMA-triggered H2O2 production was observed 
and the level of H2O2 production did not fall below that of 
untreated-inflammatory macrophages that had not received an EIgG phagocytic 
challenge.
The depression in Fc receptor phagocytic function was unaltered with 
macrophage activation.
These results indicate that activated macrophages are 
resistant to the depression of respiratory burst capacity caused by erythrocyte 
phagocytosis and suggests that IFN gamma treatment may be effective in 
preventing the impairment of host defense against bacterial infection that is 
associated with erythrocyte phagocytosis.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00917621
PMID: 1526661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A pilot observational study of the association between fatigue after stroke and C-reactive protein <jats:p> Background: The aetiology of fatigue after stroke is unknown. We explored the relationship between fatigue and C-reactive protein (CRP) as a marker of inflammation. </jats:p><jats:p> Methods: This cross-sectional study recruited inpatients with a stroke (onset within the previous three months) over a five-week period. Those with dysphasia or confusion severe enough to prevent informed consent and those with current infection were excluded. A semi-structured interview determined a) fulfilment of a case definition for fatigue and b) severity of fatigue (fatigue assessment scale
 FAS).
Venous blood was taken for CRP.
A hospital anxiety and depression score (HADS) was used to screen for emotional distress.
</jats:p><jats:p> Results: Of the 28 patients recruited (mean age 72.7 years, proportion men 47%), 15 (53%) fulfilled the case definition for fatigue.
C-reactive protein data were logarithmically transformed for analysis.
C-reactive protein levels did not differ significantly between those with and without fatigue, according to the case definition (n=28, p=0.35).
After exclusion of those with pre-stroke fatigue and those with high scores on the HADS (suggestive of emotional distress), the geometric mean CRP of the fatigued group was 16.04 mg/l (95% CI: 7.12–36.14) compared with 5.16 mg/l (95% CI: 2.7–9.85) in the non-fatigued group (n=21, p=0.025, unpaired t test), but the relationship between FAS and CRP was not statistically significant (r=0.37, p= 0.098).
</jats:p><jats:p> Conclusion: This pilot study is the first to demonstrate an association between fatigue after stroke and higher CRP, after excluding patients with pre-stroke fatigue and those with probable mood disorders.
If this finding is confirmed in a larger number of patients, it might provide a target for treating fatigue after stroke.
</jats:p>
The novel nicotinic receptor antagonist
 N,N′-dodecane-1,12-diyl-bis-3-picolinium dibromide (bPiDDB), inhibits nicotine-evoked [3H]norepinephrine overflow from rat hippocampal slices 1.
Biochem Pharmacol.
2009 Oct 1;78(7):889-97. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.07.010.
Epub  2009 Jul 23.
The novel nicotinic receptor antagonist, 
N,N'-dodecane-1,12-diyl-bis-3-picolinium dibromide (bPiDDB), inhibits 
nicotine-evoked [(3)H]norepinephrine overflow from rat hippocampal slices.
Smith AM(1), Dhawan GK, Zhang Z, Siripurapu KB, Crooks PA, Dwoskin LP.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, College of Pharmacy, University of 
Kentucky, Lexington, KY 40536-0082, United States.
Smoking is a significant health concern and strongly correlated with clinical 
depression.
Depression is associated with decreased extracellular NE 
concentrations in brain.
Smokers may be self-medicating and alleviating their 
depression through nicotine stimulated norepinephrine (NE) release.
Several 
antidepressants inhibit NE transporter (NET) function, thereby augmenting 
extracellular NE concentrations.
Antidepressants, such as bupropion, also 
inhibit nicotinic receptor (nAChR) function.
The current study determined if a 
recently discovered novel nAChR antagonist, 
N,N'-dodecane-1,12-diyl-bis-3-picolinium dibromide (bPiDDB), inhibits 
nicotine-evoked NE release from superfused rat hippocampal slices.
Previous 
studies determined that bPiDDB potently (IC(50)=2 nM) inhibits nicotine-evoked 
striatal [(3)H]dopamine (DA) release in vitro, nicotine-evoked DA release in 
nucleus accumbens in vivo, and nicotine self-administration in rats.
In the 
current study, nicotine stimulated [(3)H]NE release from rat hippocampal slices 
(EC(50)=50 microM).
bPiDDB inhibited (IC(50)=430 nM; I(max)=90%) [(3)H]NE 
release evoked by 30 microM nicotine.
For comparison, the nonselective nAChR 
antagonist, mecamylamine, and the alpha7 antagonist, methyllycaconitine, also 
inhibited nicotine-evoked [(3)H]NE release (IC(50)=31 and 275 nM, respectively; 
I(max)=91% and 72%, respectively).
Inhibition by bPiDDB and mecamylamine was not 
overcome by increasing nicotine concentrations; Schild regression slope was 
different from unity, consistent with allosteric inhibition.
Thus, bPiDDB was 
200-fold more potent inhibiting nAChRs mediating nicotine-evoked [(3)H]DA 
release from striatum than those mediating nicotine-evoked [(3)H]NE release from 
hippocampus.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2009.07.010
PMCID: PMC3090002
PMID: 19631612 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Quaternary 4- (and 5-) azolylpyridazinium salts. New class of oral hypoglycemic agents 1. J Med Chem. 1972 Dec;15(12):1326-8. doi: 10.1021/jm00282a031.

Quaternary 4- (and 5-) azolylpyridazinium salts. A new class of oral 
hypoglycemic agents.

Wiegand GE
 Bauer VJ, Safir SR, Blickens DA, Riggi SJ.
DOI: 10.1021/jm00282a031
PMID: 4635983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ornithine decarboxylase activity and polyamine synthesis during kidney hypertrophy 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1972 Aug 18;279(1):184-93. doi: 
10.1016/0304-4165(72)90253-x.

Ornithine decarboxylase activity and polyamine synthesis during kidney 
hypertrophy.

Brandt JT
 Pierce DA, Fausto N.

DOI: 10.1016/0304-4165(72)90253-x
PMID: 4119904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Histone Deacetylases Control Neurogenesis in Embryonic Brain by Inhibition of BMP2/4 Signaling 1. PLoS One. 2008 Jul 16;3(7):e2668. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002668.

Histone deacetylases control neurogenesis in embryonic brain by inhibition of 
BMP2/4 signaling.

Shakèd M(1)
 Weissmüller K, Svoboda H, Hortschansky P, Nishino N, Wölfl S, 
Tucker KL.
Author information:
(1)Interdisciplinary Center for Neurosciences, University of Heidelberg, 
Heidelberg, Germany.
BACKGROUND: Histone-modifying enzymes are essential for a wide variety of 
cellular processes dependent upon changes in gene expression.
Histone 
deacetylases (HDACs) lead to the compaction of chromatin and subsequent 
silencing of gene transcription, and they have recently been implicated in a 
diversity of functions and dysfunctions in the postnatal and adult brain 
including ocular dominance plasticity, memory consolidation, drug addiction, and 
depression.
Here we investigate the role of HDACs in the generation of neurons 
and astrocytes in the embryonic brain.
PRINCIPAL FINDINGS: As a variety of HDACs are expressed in differentiating 
neural progenitor cells, we have taken a pharmacological approach to inhibit 
multiple family members.
Inhibition of class I and II HDACs in developing mouse 
embryos with trichostatin A resulted in a dramatic reduction in neurogenesis in 
the ganglionic eminences and a modest increase in neurogenesis in the cortex.
An 
identical effect was observed upon pharmacological inhibition of HDACs in in 
vitro-differentiating neural precursors derived from the same brain regions.
A 
reduction in neurogenesis in ganglionic eminence-derived neural precursors was 
accompanied by an increase in the production of immature astrocytes.
We show 
that HDACs control neurogenesis by inhibition of the bone morphogenetic protein 
BMP2/4 signaling pathway in radial glial cells.
HDACs function at the 
transcriptional level by inhibiting and promoting, respectively, the expression 
of Bmp2 and Smad7, an intracellular inhibitor of BMP signaling.
Inhibition of 
the BMP2/4 signaling pathway restored normal levels of neurogenesis and 
astrogliogenesis to both ganglionic eminence- and cortex-derived cultures in 
which HDACs were inhibited.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate a transcriptionally-based regulation of 
BMP2/4 signaling by HDACs both in vivo and in vitro that is critical for 
neurogenesis in the ganglionic eminences and that modulates cortical 
neurogenesis.
The results also suggest that HDACs may regulate the developmental 
switch from neurogenesis to astrogliogenesis that occurs in late gestation.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0002668
PMCID: PMC2441862
PMID: 18628975 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Effects of repeated selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor paroxetine treatments on mouse forced swimming. 1. Methods Find Exp Clin Pharmacol. 1999 Nov;21(9):599-601.

Effects of repeated selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor paroxetine treatments 
on mouse forced swimming.

Akagawa Y(1)
 Masuda Y, Maruyama A, Shimizu T, Hishikawa Y.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Akita University School of Medicine, Japan.
Studies were performed in the mouse forced swimming model, a well known 
experimental depression model, in order to detect the mechanism of the 
antidepressive effects induced by repeated serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) 
dosing.
Five-day repeat dosing of a typical SSRI, paroxetine, increased 
climbing, a distinctive antidepressive behavior, 1 h after but not 1 h before 
treatment.
The coinjection of paroxetine and serum in mice treated with four 
repeated doses of paroxetine distinctively increased the behavior, but the 
coinjection of paroxetine and serum in mice without paroxetine did not.
These 
results indicate that repeated dosing of paroxetine produces a serum substance 
related to the antidepressive effects induced by serotonin neuron activities.
Furthermore, the behavior induced by 5-day repeated dosing of paroxetine was 
decreased by 100 and 10 micrograms/kg of ketanserin (5-HT2 antagonist) and 100 
micrograms/kg of LY-278584 (5-HT3 antagonist).
The present findings strongly 
suggest that repeated dosing of paroxetine produces a serum substance 
stimulating the antidepressive neuronal pathway sensitively mediated by 5-HT2 
and 5-HT3 receptor activity.
PMID: 10669904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Behavioral depression in pigeons following L-tryptophan administration 1. Life Sci. 1975 May 1;16(9):1471-6. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(75)90044-2.

Behavioral depression in pigeons following l-tryptophan administration.

Hingtgen JN
 Aprison MH.
DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(75)90044-2
PMID: 1134205 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Experimental diminution fo splenci function by selective embolization of the splenic artery. 1. Surg Gynecol Obstet. 1975 May;140(5):715-20.

Experimental diminution fo splenci function by selective embolization of the 
splenic artery.

Chuang VP
 Reuter SR.
The splenic artery was occluded by the selective injection of Amicar-mixed clot 
or Gelfoam in 18 dogs.
The dogs were sacrificed at 24 hours, two weeks and two 
months.
Angiography was done before and after embolization, three hours after 
embolization and prior to sacrifice.
White blood counts and hematocrit values 
were evaluated weekly in the dogs sacrificed at two months.
The results of this 
study reveal differences in the effects of the two embolic materials.
Because 
Amicar-mixed clot was partially lysed in the first several hours and also pushed 
peripherally, the depression of hematologic function seen with its use was 
transient and most spleens returned to a relatively normal gross and histologic 
appearance.
With Gelfoam, although the embolic material was also pushed 
peripherally into the branches of the splenic artery in several of the dogs, the 
depression of hematologic function was prolonged, and moderate splenic 
parenchymal fibrosis was seen.
The areas between the bands of fibrosis appeared 
normal.
The results indicate that selective embolic occlusion of the splenic 
artery and its branches may offer a method of depressing splenic function in 
patients who are not candidates for splenectomy.
PMID: 1145406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of various stresses
 corticosteroids and adrenergic agents on phagocytosis in the rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss 1.
Fish Physiol Biochem.
1994 May;13(1):31-40. doi: 10.1007/BF00004117.
The effect of various stresses, corticosteroids and adrenergic agents on 
phagocytosis in the rainbow trout Oncorhynchus mykiss.
Narnaware YK(1), Baker BI, Tomlinson MG.
Author information:
(1)School of Biological Sciences, Bath University, Bath, BA2 7AY, England.
The effect of acute and chronic stress on the phagocytic activity of putative 
macrophages from the rainbow trout.
Oncorhynchus mykiss has been assessed, using 
an in vitro phagocytic index, in which the average number of engulfed yeast 
cells in a population of phagocytes is determined.
An injection stress given 
under light anaesthesia, or a longer noise stress combined with confinement, 
both significantly reduced, within 3 h, the level of phagocytic activity of 
macrophages from the spleen and pronephros.
Daily injection stress over six days 
had a lesser effect on the proportion of phagocytically active cells even though 
plasma cortisol levels were equally raised.
Daily dexamethasone injection 
depressed the proportion of phagocytically active cells more than saline 
injection.
In these in vivo experiments, it was not possible to determine 
whether stress and steroids depressed the phagocytic activity of individual 
macrophages or caused the active macrophages to migrate out of the spleen and 
pronephros.
Administration of cortisol (200 nM) to trout macrophages in vitro 
failed to depress phagocytic activity within a 3h period but both α- and 
β-adrenergic agonists (10 μM) were usually depressive.
It is proposed that the 
autonomic nervous system may be an early regulator of macrophage phagocytosis 
following stress and that corticosteroids only exert their suppressive effect on 
macrophage activity in the longer term.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00004117
PMID: 24203269
Frequency‐dependent recruitment of inhibition mediated by stellate cells in the rat cerebellar cortex <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>In the cerebellum
 dendritic inhibition of Purkinje cells (PCs) is mediated by stellate cells (SCs).
These inhibitory interneurons are critically involved in the cerebellar network; they control the timing and firing frequency of PCs, the only output cells of the cerebellar cortex.
However, the underlying properties of parallel fiber (PF) to SC excitatory synapses have not been fully determined.
To characterize the conditions favoring the recruitment of SCs in the cerebellum, we analyzed evoked and spontaneous excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) recorded from SCs of rat cerebellar slices.
We found that SC EPSCs evoked with single suprathreshold‐intensity stimulations were mostly unitary, with a large amplitude and variable latencies, and failed with a high rate.
Increasing the frequency of stimulation above 60 Hz significantly reduced failures, whereas mean SC EPSC amplitude was increased by less than 20%.
Decreasing failures at PF‐SC synapses experimentally enhanced the number of asynchronous SC EPSCs per stimulation but, again, moderately increased the mean SC EPSC amplitude.
Finally, brief presynaptic bursts transiently depressed synaptic transmission.
This depression resulted from the release of endocannabinoids and might act as a negative‐feedback mechanism.
Thus, we conclude that SC EPSCs evoked with single suprathreshold‐intensity stimulations are mostly unitary and that PF‐SC synapse efficacy is highly regulated by the presynaptic temporal pattern of activity and the frequency of afferent inputs.
Such synaptic properties may control the responsiveness of SC synapses to the frequency of PF stimulations, which may control the spatial extent and duration of the recruitment of inhibition in the cerebellar cortex.
© 2005 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
Calcium Time Course as a Signal for Spike-Timing–Dependent Plasticity <jats:p> Calcium has been proposed as a postsynaptic signal underlying synaptic spike-timing–dependent plasticity (STDP). We examine this hypothesis with computational modeling based on experimental results from hippocampal cultures
 some of which are presented here, in which pairs and triplets of pre- and postsynaptic spikes induce potentiation and depression in a temporally asymmetric way.
Specifically, we present a set of model biochemical detectors, based on plausible molecular pathways, which make direct use of the time course of the calcium signal to reproduce these experimental STDP results.
Our model features a modular structure, in which long-term potentiation (LTP) and depression (LTD) components compete to determine final plasticity outcomes; one aspect of this competition is a veto through which appropriate calcium time courses suppress LTD. Simulations of our model are also shown to be consistent with classical LTP and LTD induced by several presynaptic stimulation paradigms.
Overall, our results provide computational evidence that, while the postsynaptic calcium time course contains sufficient information to distinguish various experimental long-term plasticity paradigms, small changes in the properties of back-propagation of action potentials or in synaptic dynamics can alter the calcium time course in ways that will significantly affect STDP induction by any detector based exclusively on postsynaptic calcium.
This may account for the variability of STDP outcomes seen within hippocampal cultures, under repeated application of a single experimental protocol, as well as for that seen in multiple spike experiments across different systems.
</jats:p>
Dobutamine “Stress” Test and Latent Cardiac Susceptibility to Inhaled Diesel Exhaust in Normal and Hypertensive Rats 1. Environ Health Perspect. 2012 Aug;120(8):1088-93. doi: 10.1289/ehp.1104684.
Epub  2012 Apr 27.

Dobutamine "stress" test and latent cardiac susceptibility to inhaled diesel 
exhaust in normal and hypertensive rats.

Hazari MS(1)
 Callaway J, Winsett DW, Lamb C, Haykal-Coates N, Krantz QT, King 
C, Costa DL, Farraj AK.
Author information:
(1)Environmental Public Health Division, National Health and Environmental 
Effects Research Laboratory, U.S. Environmental Protection Agency, Research 
Triangle Park, North Carolina 27711, USA.
hazari.mehdi@epa.gov

BACKGROUND: Exercise "stress" testing is a screening tool used to determine the 
amount of stress for which the heart can compensate before developing abnormal 
rhythm or ischemia, particularly in susceptible persons.
Although this approach 
has been used to assess risk in humans exposed to air pollution, it has never 
been applied to rodent studies.
OBJECTIVE: We hypothesized that a single exposure to diesel exhaust (DE) would 
increase the risk of adverse cardiac events such as arrhythmia and myocardial 
ischemia in rats undergoing a dobutamine challenge test, which can be used to 
mimic exercise-like stress.
METHODS: Wistar-Kyoto normotensive (WKY) and spontaneously hypertensive (SH) 
rats implanted with radiotelemeters and a chronic intravenous catheter were 
whole-body exposed to 150 μg/m3 DE for 4 hr.
Increasing doses of dobutamine, a 
β1-adrenergic agonist, were administered to conscious unrestrained rats 24 hr 
later to elicit the cardiac response observed during exercise while heart rate 
(HR) and electrocardiogram (ECG) were monitored.
RESULTS: A single exposure to DE potentiated the HR response of WKY and SH rats 
during dobutamine challenge and prevented HR recovery at rest.
During peak 
challenge, DE-exposed SH rats had lower overall HR variability when compared 
with controls, in addition to transient ST depression.
All DE-exposed animals 
also had increased arrhythmias.
CONCLUSIONS: These results are the first evidence that rats exhibit 
stress-induced cardiac dysrhythmia and ischemia sensitivity comparable to humans 
after a single exposure to a toxic air pollutant, particularly when in the 
presence of underlying cardiovascular disease.
Thus, exposure to low 
concentrations of air pollution can impair the heart's ability to respond to 
stress and increase the risk of subsequent triggered dysfunction.
DOI: 10.1289/ehp.1104684
PMCID: PMC3440084
PMID: 22543081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: This work has been reviewed and approved for 
release by the National Health and Environmental Effects Research Laboratory, 
U.S. EPA.
Approval does not signify that the contents necessarily reflect the 
views and policies of the U.S. EPA, nor does mention of trade names.
The authors 
declare they have no actual or potential competing financial interests.
Increased Signaling via Adenosine A1 Receptors
 Sleep Deprivation, Imipramine, and Ketamine Inhibit Depressive-like Behavior via Induction of Homer1a 1.
Neuron.
2015 Aug 5;87(3):549-62. doi: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.07.010.
Increased Signaling via Adenosine A1 Receptors, Sleep Deprivation, Imipramine, 
and Ketamine Inhibit Depressive-like Behavior via Induction of Homer1a.
Serchov T(1), Clement HW(2), Schwarz MK(3), Iasevoli F(4), Tosh DK(5), Idzko 
M(6), Jacobson KA(5), de Bartolomeis A(4), Normann C(1), Biber K(7), van Calker 
D(8).
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center 
Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(2)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
Medical Center Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(3)Functional Neuroconnectomics Group, Department of Epileptology, Life and 
Brain Centre, University of Bonn, Medical School, 53105 Bonn, Germany.
(4)Laboratory of Molecular and Translational Psychiatry, Department of 
Neuroscience University of Naples Federico II, 80131 Naples, Italy.
(5)National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases, National 
Institute of Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
(6)Department of Pneumology, University Medical Center, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
(7)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center 
Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany; Department of Neuroscience, University 
Medical Center Groningen, University of Groningen, 9713 AV Groningen, the 
Netherlands.
Electronic address: knut.biber@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
(8)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University Medical Center 
Freiburg, 79104 Freiburg, Germany.
Electronic address: 
dietrich.calker@uniklinik-freiburg.de.
Major depressive disorder is among the most commonly diagnosed disabling mental 
diseases.
Several non-pharmacological treatments of depression upregulate 
adenosine concentration and/or adenosine A1 receptors (A1R) in the brain.
To 
test whether enhanced A1R signaling mediates antidepressant effects, we 
generated a transgenic mouse with enhanced doxycycline-regulated A1R expression, 
specifically in forebrain neurons.
Upregulating A1R led to pronounced acute and 
chronic resilience toward depressive-like behavior in various tests.
Conversely, 
A1R knockout mice displayed an increased depressive-like behavior and were 
resistant to the antidepressant effects of sleep deprivation (SD).
Various 
antidepressant treatments increase homer1a expression in medial prefrontal 
cortex (mPFC).
Specific siRNA knockdown of homer1a in mPFC enhanced 
depressive-like behavior and prevented the antidepressant effects of A1R 
upregulation, SD, imipramine, and ketamine treatment.
In contrast, viral 
overexpression of homer1a in the mPFC had antidepressant effects.
Thus, 
increased expression of homer1a is a final common pathway mediating the 
antidepressant effects of different antidepressant treatments.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuron.2015.07.010
PMCID: PMC4803038
PMID: 26247862 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cochlear dysfunction induced by arterial obstruction in the cat anterior cerebellar artery. 1. Nihon Jibiinkoka Gakkai Kaiho. 1989 Nov;92(11):1863-8. doi: 
10.3950/jibiinkoka.92.1863.

[Cochlear dysfunction induced by arterial obstruction in the cat anterior 
cerebellar artery].

[Article in Japanese]

Ito H.

To determine the effects of circulatory disorder on the cochlear function
 
compound action potentials (AP) were measured in cats with the anterior 
cerebellar and the labyrinthine arteries occluded.
While transitory AP 
depression followed the anterior cerebellar artery occlusion in approximately 
one third of the animals, there were no changes in the others.
In contrast to 
this, AP disappeared rapidly in all cases with labyrinthine artery occlusion and 
recovered only after release of the occlusion in a period of time proportionate 
to the duration of occlusion.
The different ways of response in the two 
occlusion sites seem to be attributed mainly to a greater chance of collateral 
circulations in the proximal.
In addition, wide range of variance was observed 
from cat to cat in the effect of the anterior cerebellar artery occlusion and in 
the recovery following the release of occlusion in the labyrinthine artery, 
which may be attributed to anatomical variation inherent in the artery system.
DOI: 10.3950/jibiinkoka.92.1863
PMID: 2593033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The postnatal development of the insertions of the medial collateral ligament in the rat knee 1. Anat Embryol (Berl). 1996 Jan;193(1):53-59. doi: 10.1007/BF00186833.

The postnatal development of the insertions of the medial collateral ligament in 
the rat knee.

Wei X(1)
 Messner K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Sports Medicine, University Linköping, Sweden.
Bone soft tissue remodelling at the femoral and tibial insertions of the medial 
collateral ligament (MCL) of the rat knee was monitored at regular intervals 
from birth to 120 days of age in 40 Sprague Dawley rats.
At birth the femoral 
insertion originated from the perichondrium of the epiphysis.
By day 8 the 
perichondrium within the insertion had turned into fibrocartilage.
Secondary 
ossification of the femoral epiphysis had progressed in the region near to the 
insertion site by day 15.
The epiphyseal cartilage was entirely replaced by bone 
by day 40 except for the fibrocartilage within the insertion.
After that stage, 
no qualitative change in zonal insertion characteristics was observed, but only 
increase in size and decrease in cellularity.
At birth, the tibial ligament 
inserted onto the thin cortical bone of the metaphysis via periosteum.
At day 8, 
osteoclasts started to resorb the thin cortical bone at the ligament insertion, 
thus forming a metaphyseal depression between days 10 and 20.
From days 20 to 
120, the insertion remained qualitatively unchanged, showing three zones, the 
ligament, periosteum, and metaphyseal trabecular bone.
The deep periosteal layer 
showed osteoclastic activity in the proximal part and osteoblastic activity in 
the distal part.
The migration-mechanism of the ligament insertion during growth 
seems to be caused by this growth-related osteoclastic resorption of the 
proximal metaphyseal bone and by simultaneous osteogenic activity, which 
successively cements the distal part of the ligament to bone.
The persistence of 
the periosteal layer and the metaphyseal depression for up to 120 days may be 
regarded as a sign of continuing growth in this animal model.
This is the first 
investigation showing that the formation of the metaphyseal depression is a 
purely postnatal event, and suggests that this process might be initiated by the 
change in mode of growth and joint biomechanics after birth, enabling ligament 
development and migration in a growing and increasingly loaded weight-bearing 
joint.
The mainly resorptive process, which takes place during development of 
the tibial MCL insertion, may account for the tensile failure of this ligament 
that commonly occurs at this site during growth.
The pronounced morphological 
differences between the chondral femoral and the periosteal tibial attachment of 
the adult MCL are apparently caused by the different postnatal development 
processes at epiphyses and metaphyses.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00186833
PMID: 8838496 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Changes in saccharin preference behavior as a primary outcome to evaluate pain and analgesia in acetic acid-induced visceral pain in mice 1. J Pain Res. 2015 Oct 6;8:663-73. doi: 10.2147/JPR.S91230. eCollection 2015.

Changes in saccharin preference behavior as a primary outcome to evaluate pain 
and analgesia in acetic acid-induced visceral pain in mice.

de la Puente B(1)
 Romero-Alejo E(1), Vela JM(1), Merlos M(1), Zamanillo D(1), 
Portillo-Salido E(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Drug Discovery and Preclinical Development, 
ESTEVE, Barcelona, Spain.
Reflex-based procedures are important measures in preclinical pain studies that 
evaluate stimulated behaviors.
These procedures, however, are insufficient to 
capture the complexity of the pain experience, which is often associated with 
the depression of several innate behaviors.
While recent studies have made 
efforts to evidence the suppression of some positively motivated behaviors in 
certain pain models, they are still far from being routinely used as readouts 
for analgesic screening.
Here, we characterized and compared the effect of the 
analgesic ibuprofen (Ibu) and the stimulant, caffeine, in assays of acute 
pain-stimulated and pain-depressed behavior.
Intraperitoneal injection of acetic 
acid (AA) served as a noxious stimulus to stimulate a writhing response or 
depress saccharin preference and locomotor activity (LMA) in mice.
AA injection 
caused the maximum number of writhes between 5 and 20 minutes after 
administration, and writhing almost disappeared 1 hour later.
AA-treated mice 
showed signs of depression-like behaviors after writhing resolution, as 
evidenced by reduced locomotion and saccharin preference for at least 4 and 6 
hours, respectively.
Depression-like behaviors resolved within 24 hours after AA 
administration.
A dose of Ibu (40 mg/kg) - inactive to reduce AA-induced 
abdominal writhing - administered before or after AA injection significantly 
reverted pain-induced saccharin preference deficit.
The same dose of Ibu also 
significantly reverted the AA-depressed LMA, but only when it was administered 
after AA injection.
Caffeine restored locomotion - but not saccharin preference 
- in AA-treated mice, thus suggesting that the reduction in saccharin preference 
- but not in locomotion - was specifically sensitive to analgesics.
In 
conclusion, AA-induced acute pain attenuated saccharin preference and LMA beyond 
the resolution of writhing behavior, and the changes in the expression of 
hedonic behavior, such as sweet taste preference, can be used as a more 
sensitive and translational model to evaluate analgesics.
DOI: 10.2147/JPR.S91230
PMCID: PMC4605237
PMID: 26504405
Effects of ethylenediamine – a putative GABA-releasing agent – on rat hippocampal slices and neocortical activity in vivo 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2011 Jan 15;650(2-3):568-78. doi:
10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.10.061.  Epub 2010 Nov 2.

Effects of ethylenediamine--a putative GABA-releasing agent--on rat hippocampal 
slices and neocortical activity in vivo.

Stone TW(1)
 Lui C, Addae JI.
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience and Molecular Pharmacology, Faculty of Biomedical and Life 
Sciences, University of Glasgow, Glasgow G12 8QQ, UK.
Trevor.Stone@glasgow.ac.uk

The simple diamine diaminoethane (ethylenediamine, EDA) has been shown to 
activate GABA receptors in the central and peripheral nervous systems, partly by 
a direct action and partly by releasing endogenous GABA.
These effects have been 
shown to be produced by the complexation of EDA with bicarbonate to form a 
carbamate.
The present work has compared EDA, GABA and β-alanine responses in 
rat CA1 neurons using extracellular and intracellular recordings, as well as 
neocortical evoked potentials in vivo.
Superfusion of GABA onto hippocampal 
slices produced depolarisation and a decrease of field epsps, both effects 
fading rapidly, but showing sensitivity to blockade by bicuculline.
EDA produced 
an initial hyperpolarisation and increase of extracellular field epsp size with 
no fade and only partial sensitivity to bicuculline, with subsequent 
depolarisation, while β-alanine produces a much larger underlying 
hyperpolarisation and increase in fepsps, followed by depolarisation and 
inhibition of fepsps.
The responses to β-alanine, but not GABA or EDA, were 
blocked by strychnine.
In vivo experiments, recording somatosensory evoked 
potentials, confirmed that EDA produced an initial increase followed by 
depression, and that this effect was not fully blocked by bicuculline.
Overall 
the results indicate that EDA has actions in addition to the activation of GABA 
receptors.
These actions are not attributable to activation of 
β-alanine-sensitive glycine receptors, but may involve the activation of sites 
sensitive to adipic acid, which is structurally equivalent to the dicarbamate of 
EDA.
The results emphasise the complex pharmacology of simple amines in 
bicarbonate-containing solutions.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2010.10.061
PMID: 21050846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adrenocortical Function of the Domestic Fowl: Effects of Orchiectomy and Androgen Replacement 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1987 Jun;185(2):223-32. doi:
10.3181/00379727-185-42539.

Adrenocortical function of the domestic fowl: effects of orchiectomy and 
androgen replacement.

Carsia RV
 Reisch NM, Fennell MJ, Weber H.

The effect of orchiectomy and androgen replacement on cockerel adrenocortical 
function was investigated.
Orchiectomized cockerels (2 weeks old) were implanted 
with Silastic tubing containing various amounts of one of the following 
steroids: cholesterol, testosterone (T), androstenedione (A4), and 5 
alpha-dihydrotestosterone (DHT).
Birds were administered additional implants, 
containing doses of steroids equivalent to those of the initial implants, at 4 
and 8 weeks of treatment (i.e., 6 and 10 weeks of age).
Sham-operated cockerels 
administered empty implants served as intact controls for comparison of data.
Animals were killed after 10 weeks of treatment (12 weeks old).
Trunk plasma 
corticosterone (B) and plasma T, and B production by collagenase-isolated 
adrenocortical cells incubated briefly (2 hr) with or without steroidogenic 
agents were measured by radioimmunoassay.
Orchiectomy with implantation of the 
inert sterol, cholesterol (hereafter referred to as orchiectomy), did not alter 
plasma B concentrations and did not affect basal cellular B production or 
cellular B production induced by a maximal steroidogenic concentration of ACTH 
or that maximally supported by 25-hydroxycholesterol.
However, orchiectomy did 
lower maximal 8-bromo-cyclic AMP-induced B production by 30%.
Low-implant doses 
of A4 (1-cm implant) and T (0.3-cm implant), that maintained comb growth, 
lowered plasma B concentrations by 24-42%, whereas a high-implant dose of T 
(3-cm implant) and all implant doses of DHT had no effect on plasma B 
concentrations.
Thus, androgen replacement had different effects on plasma B 
depending on the type of androgen and the implant dose.
In contrast, androgen 
replacement consistently suppressed basal and maximal ACTH-induced cellular B 
production regardless of the type of androgen.
Furthermore, the degree of 
suppression was dose-dependent.
These results suggest that the differential 
effect of androgen replacement on plasma B concentrations was due to differences 
in the clearance of circulating B and/or differences in blood volume.
In 
addition, the present study suggests that in the absence of the testes, 
androgens are suppressants of adrenocortical cell function in the domestic fowl.
DOI: 10.3181/00379727-185-42539
PMID: 3033685 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Decrease of the platelet 5‐HT<sub>2A</sub> receptor function by long‐term imipramine treatment in endogenous depression <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:sec><jats:title>Background</jats:title><jats:p>Animal studies have found that many antidepressants induce decreases in both the density and the functional activity of the serotonin 2A (5‐HT<jats:sub>2A</jats:sub>) receptor subtype. However
 the extrapolation of findings to humans has been inconclusive.
A physiological platelet response mediated by this receptor, the serotonin‐amplified platelet aggregation, was measured to study whether long‐term antidepressant treatment induces changes in 5‐HT<jats:sub>2A</jats:sub> receptor functioning in endogenous depressed patients.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Method</jats:title><jats:p>The percentage of serotonin‐amplified platelet aggregation to adenosine diphosphate (ADP) was studied in 15 untreated patients with major depressive disorder (DSM‐IV) with endogenous features (Newcastle scale).
This index was used as an indirect measurement of the functional status of platelet 5‐HT<jats:sub>2A</jats:sub> receptors.
Aggregation studies were repeated once remission of the symptoms was achieved during treatment with imipramine (150–300 mg/day).
A group of 15 concurrent normal subjects was used as a control.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p>A statistically significant decrease (<jats:italic>p</jats:italic> = 0.038) in the percentage of serotonin‐amplified platelet aggregation to ADP was observed when remission was achieved (after 145 ± 27 days).</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title><jats:p>The results showed a decrease in a platelet functional response mediated by 5‐HT<jats:sub>2A</jats:sub> receptors following effective imipramine treatment, suggesting that desensitization or down‐regulation of the 5‐HT<jats:sub>2A</jats:sub> receptor function could be linked to the therapeutic effect of some antidepressants.
The data also support the use of platelet aggregometry as a surrogate measurement of antidepressant action, particularly in intra‐subject designs.
Copyright © 2004 John Wiley &amp; Sons, Ltd.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Coping with Chronic Social Stress in Mice: Hypothalamic-Pituitary-Adrenal/ Sympathetic-Adrenal-Medullary Axis Activity
 Behavioral Changes and Effects of Antalarmin Treatment: Implications for the Study of Stress-Related Psychopathologies <jats:p>The aim of this study was to analyze the individual differences that lead to the development of psychopathological changes in response to chronic social stress.
We also assessed the ability of an antagonist of the corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) receptors to reverse the effects of stress.
Male adult mice were exposed to repeated defeat experiences for 21 days using a sensorial contact model.
After 18 days of defeat, two groups of subjects were established (active and passive), according to their behaviors during social confrontation.
Antalarmin treatment was given for 4 and 6 days.
The results corroborated previous data indicating that subjects who adopted a passive coping strategy had higher corticosterone levels after 21 days of defeat and decreased resting levels 3 days later.
Moreover, they showed higher resting expression levels of hypothalamic CRH than their active counterparts.
On day 24, the experimental animals were subjected to another social defeat to determine whether the stress response remained.
The increase in corticosterone and hypothalamic CRH levels was similar for all of the stressed subjects, but the passive subjects also had a greater CRH response in the amygdala.
Passive subjects had decreased levels of adrenal dopamine β-hydroxylase, tyrosine hydroxylase and plasma adrenaline compared to the active subjects, and lower plasma noradrenaline levels than manipulated controls.
The passive profile of physiological changes in both the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal and sympathetic-adrenal-medullary (SAM) axes has been associated with changes related to mood disorders, such as posttraumatic stress disorder and depression.
The active coping profile is characterized by similar corticosterone resting levels to controls and increased SAM activity.
Both profiles showed alterations in the novel palatable and forced swimming tests, with the passive profile being the most vulnerable to the effects of stress in this last test.
Pharmacological treatment with antalarmin failed to reverse the effects of stress.</jats:p>
Biphasic metabolic rate trajectory of pupal diapause termination and post-diapause development in a tephritid fly 1. J Insect Physiol. 2009 Apr;55(4):344-50. doi: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2008.12.013. 
Epub 2009 Feb 4.

Biphasic metabolic rate trajectory of pupal diapause termination and 
post-diapause development in a tephritid fly.

Ragland GJ(1)
 Fuller J, Feder JL, Hahn DA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Entomology and Nematology, University of Florida, USA.
gragland@ufl.edu

Metabolic depression is a highly conserved feature of insect diapause, and an 
increase in metabolism is a reliable indicator of diapause termination and the 
initiation of post-diapause development.
The trajectory of metabolic rate 
following diapause termination can guide the identification of important 
physiological and developmental landmarks during this developmental transition, 
yet quantitative descriptions of these trajectories are relatively rare.
Here we 
track changes in metabolic rate from diapause through diapause termination and 
pharate adult development in Rhagoletis pomonella (Diptera: Tephritidae), a 
univoltine tephritid fly that diapauses in the pupal stage.
Using respirometric 
monitoring we show that diapause termination and subsequent pharate adult 
development is characterized by a biphasic increase in metabolic rate.
Respiration rate initially increases logistically, reaching a plateau that is 
followed by a final, exponential increase terminating in adult eclosion.
We 
develop a non-linear model describing this pattern with easily interpretable 
landmarks, and we map visible landmarks of morphogenesis onto the trajectory.
The bulk of visible morphogenesis in pharate adult development occurs relatively 
late in the trajectory during the final, exponential phase, that matches the 
U-shaped trajectory of non-diapause individuals.
These results mirror a 
qualitative description of the same trajectories of diapause and non-diapause 
flesh flies (Sarcophaga).
Overall, our results suggest that (1) the course of 
diapause breakage and post-diapause development may be evolutionarily conserved 
in higher flies with pupal diapause, and (2) the biphasic trajectory is distinct 
from a more continuous trajectory observed during direct development.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jinsphys.2008.12.013
PMID: 19200436 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Central effect of the non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents
 indometacin, ibuprofen, and diclofenac, determined in C fibre-evoked activity in single neurones of the rat thalamus 1.
Pain.
1990 Apr;41(1):71-80. doi: 10.1016/0304-3959(90)91111-U.
Central effect of the non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents, indomethacin, 
ibuprofen, and diclofenac, determined in C fibre-evoked activity in single 
neurones of the rat thalamus.
Jurna I(1), Brune K.

Author information:
(1)Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, Universität des Saarlandes, 
D-6650 Homburg/ SaarF.R.G.
Institut für Pharmakologie und Toxikologie, 
Universität Nürnberg-Erlangen, D-8520 ErlangenF.R.G.
Comment in
    Pain.
2002 Feb;95(3):289-290. doi: 10.1016/S0304-3959(01)00411-0.
This study aimed to investigate if the non-steroid anti-inflammatory agents, 
indomethacin, ibuprofen, and diclofenac, are capable of depressing sensory 
responses of the nociceptive system by a central action.
For this purpose, 
experiments were carried out on rats under urethane anaesthesia in which 
activity was elicited by electrical stimulation of afferent C fibres in the 
sural nerve.
Recordings were made ipsi- or contralaterally from single neurones 
in the dorsomedial part of the ventral nucleus (VDM) of the thalamus.
The 3 
drugs produced a dose-dependent depression of the evoked activity which amounted 
to about 60% of the controls at the highest doses employed and lasted longer 
than 60 min.
Their potency ranking, according to the ED50 values (in brackets), 
is: indomethacin (5 mg/kg) greater than diclofenac (10.9 mg/kg) greater than 
ibuprofen (15.6 mg/kg).
The results suggest that a central action might 
contribute to the analgesia produced by these non-steroid anti-inflammatory 
agents.
DOI: 10.1016/0304-3959(90)91111-U
PMID: 2352767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Delta-Opioid Receptors Are Critical for Tricyclic Antidepressant Treatment of Neuropathic Allodynia 1. Biol Psychiatry. 2008 Mar 15;63(6):633-6. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.06.016.
 Epub 2007 Aug 13.

Delta-opioid receptors are critical for tricyclic antidepressant treatment of 
neuropathic allodynia.

Benbouzid M(1)
 Gavériaux-Ruff C, Yalcin I, Waltisperger E, Tessier LH, Muller 
A, Kieffer BL, Freund-Mercier MJ, Barrot M.

Author information:
(1)Institut des Neurosciences Cellulaires et Intégratives, Centre National de 
Recherche Scientifique/Université Louis Pasteur, Strasbourg, France.
BACKGROUND: The therapeutic effect of antidepressant drugs against depression 
usually necessitates a chronic treatment.
A large body of clinical evidence 
indicates that antidepressant drugs can also be highly effective against chronic 
neuropathic pain.
However, the mechanism by which these drugs alleviate pain is 
still unclear.
METHODS: We used a murine model of neuropathic pain induced by sciatic nerve 
constriction to study the antiallodynic properties of a chronic treatment with 
the tricyclic antidepressants nortriptyline and amitriptyline.
Using knockout 
and pharmacological approaches in mice, we determined the influence of 
delta-opioid receptors in the therapeutic action of chronic antidepressant 
treatment.
RESULTS: In our model, a chronic treatment by tricyclic antidepressant drugs 
totally suppresses the mechanical allodynia in neuropathic C57Bl/6J mice.
This 
therapeutic effect can be acutely reversed by an injection of the delta-opioid 
receptor antagonist naltrindole.
Moreover, the antiallodynic property of 
antidepressant treatment is absent in mice deficient for the delta-opioid 
receptor gene.
CONCLUSIONS: The antiallodynic effect of chronic antidepressant treatment is 
mediated by a recruitment of the endogenous opioid system acting through 
delta-opioid receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2007.06.016
PMID: 17693391 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Tff3 is Expressed in Neurons and Microglial Cells 1. Cell Physiol Biochem. 2014;34(6):1912-9. doi: 10.1159/000366389. Epub 2014 Nov
 21.

Tff3 is expressed in neurons and microglial cells.

Fu T(1)
 Stellmacher A, Znalesniak EB, Dieterich DC, Kalbacher H, Hoffmann W.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Molecular Biology and Medicinal Chemistry, Otto-von-Guericke 
University Magdeburg, Magdeburg, Germany.
BACKGROUND/AIMS: The trefoil factor family (TFF) peptide TFF3 is typically 
secreted by mucous epithelia, but is also expressed in the immune system and the 
brain.
It was the aim of this study to determine the cerebral cell types which 
express Tff3.
METHODS: Primary cultures from rat embryonic or neonatal cerebral cortex and 
hippocampus, respectively, were studied by means of RT-PCR and 
immunofluorescence.
Moreover, Tff3 expression was localized by 
immunocytochemistry in sections of adult rat cerebellum.
RESULTS: Tff3 transcripts were detectable in neural cultures of both the cortex 
and the hippocampus as well as in glial cell-enriched cultures.
Tff3 peptide 
co-localized with Map2 indicating an expression in neurons in vitro.
The 
neuronal expression was confirmed by immunofluorescence studies of adult rat 
cerebellum.
Furthermore, Tff3 peptide showed also a clear co-localization with 
Iba-1 in vitro typical of activated microglial cells.
CONCLUSION: The neuronal expression of Tff3 is in line with a function of a 
typical neuropeptide influencing, e.g., fear, memory, depression and motoric 
skills.
The expression in activated microglial cells, which is demonstrated here 
for the first time, points towards a possible function for Tff3 in immune 
reactions in the CNS.
This opens a plethora of additional possible functions for 
Tff3 including synaptic plasticity and cognition as well as during 
neuroinflammatory diseases and psychiatric disorders.
DOI: 10.1159/000366389
PMID: 25504043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Intranasal exposure of the Richardson's ground squirrel to Western equine encephalomyelitis virus. 1. Can J Comp Med. 1978 Apr;42(2):184-91.

Intranasal exposure of the Richardson's ground squirrel to Western equine 
encephalomyelitis virus.

Leung MK
 McLintock J, Iversen J.
Adult Richardson's ground squirrels were infected with western equine 
encephalomyelitis virus by intranasal instillation.
Mortality followed the 
instillation of a minimum threshold of 4.7 logs of virus while infection was 
produced by a dosage of 2.3 logs.
The incubation period was from four to seven 
days, being preceded by a viremic phase.
Signs were depression, ataxia and 
paralysis of the limbs.
Highest titres of virus were recovered from the brain 
and histopathological changes involving the central nervous system included 
meningitis, vasculitis, perivascular cuffing, gliosis, neuronophagia and 
neuronal degeneration.
The virus was also found in a variety of extraneural 
tissues.
Lesions in extraneural tissues included necrosis of brown fat and an 
apparent increase in number of Kupffer's cells in the liver.
The lymphoid tissue 
was involved indicating a possible source for viremia.
The duration and 
magnitude of viremia were ample enough to provide virus source for arthropods.
The potential for transmission of the virus independent of arthropods was 
discussed in view of the pathogenesis demonstrated in the experimental 
infections.
PMCID: PMC1277614
PMID: 667706 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Endocrine
 immune, and neurochemical changes in rats during withdrawal from chronic amphetamine intoxication.
1.
Neuropsychopharmacology.
1991 Aug;5(1):23-31.
Endocrine, immune, and neurochemical changes in rats during withdrawal from 
chronic amphetamine intoxication.
Swerdlow NR(1), Hauger R, Irwin M, Koob GF, Britton KT, Pulvirenti L.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, School of Medicine, University of California, San 
Diego, La Jolla 92093.
In humans who chronically abuse amphetamine (AMPH), sudden abstinence often 
precipitates an organic mood disorder that mimics many symptoms of major 
depression.
We report that AMPH exposure and withdrawal in rats modifies 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis endocrine responses, peripheral immune 
functions, and regional brain catecholamine levels.
Compared to vehicle-treated 
animals, rats treated with AMPH for 10 days exhibit significantly decreased 
physostigmine-induced release of adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH).
During AMPH 
withdrawal, these animals show a loss of the normal correlation between levels 
of plasma ACTH and corticosterone.
Chronic AMPH treatment in rats causes a 
significant increase in natural killer cell activity.
Brain dopamine levels in 
these animals are decreased in the caudate nucleus but are increased in the 
nucleus accumbens.
AMPH withdrawal in rats may be a useful model for studying 
the physiologic and neural substrates of human AMPH withdrawal states.
PMID: 1657016 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Repeated restraint stress enhances cue-elicited conditioned freezing and impairs acquisition of extinction in an age-dependent manner 1. Behav Brain Res. 2013 Jul 1;248:12-24. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.03.028. Epub
2013  Mar 26.

Repeated restraint stress enhances cue-elicited conditioned freezing and impairs 
acquisition of extinction in an age-dependent manner.

Zhang W(1)
 Rosenkranz JA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Cellular and Molecular Pharmacology, The Chicago Medical 
School, Rosalind Franklin University, North Chicago, IL 60064, USA.
wei.zhang@my.rfums.org

Affective disorders are believed to involve dysfunction within the amygdala, a 
key structure for processing emotional information.
Chronic stress may 
contribute to affective disorders such as depression and anxiety via its effects 
on the amygdala.
Previous research has shown that chronic stress increases 
amygdala neuronal activity in an age-dependent manner.
However, whether these 
distinct changes in amgydala neuronal activity are accompanied by age-dependent 
changes in amygdala-dependent affective behavior is unclear.
In this study, we 
investigated how chronic stress impacts amgydala-dependent auditory fear 
conditioning in adolescent and adult rats in a repeated restraint model.
We 
found that repeated restraint enhanced conditioned freezing in both adolescent 
and adult rats.
But repeated restraint led to impaired acquisition of fear 
extinction only in adolescent rats.
Along with previous findings, these results 
suggest that chronic stress may precipitate affective disorders via differential 
mechanisms, with different outcomes at different ages.
Published by Elsevier B.V.

DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2013.03.028
PMCID: PMC3677837
PMID: 23538069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pharmacological studies on the hypotensive effects of clonidine 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1971 Jan;13(2):168-74. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(71)90147-6.

Pharmacological studies on the hypotensive effects of clonidine.

Bolme P
 Fuxe K.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(71)90147-6
PMID: 5544069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differential effects of chronic unpredictable stress on hippocampal CB1 receptors in male and female rats 1. Behav Brain Res. 2009 Nov 5;203(2):264-9. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.05.013. Epub
 2009 May 19.

Differential effects of chronic unpredictable stress on hippocampal CB1 
receptors in male and female rats.

Reich CG(1)
 Taylor ME, McCarthy MM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, University of Maryland School of Medicine, 655 W. 
Baltimore Street, Baltimore, MD 21201, USA.
creich@ramapo.edu

Chronic unpredictable mild stress (CMS), an animal model of depression, 
downregulates hippocampal CB1 receptors in adult male rats.
Given that 
endocannabinoids are implicated in modulating stress and anxiety and that women 
are vulnerable to stress-related disorders, we tested the effects of CMS on both 
female and male rats.
Gonadectomized (gndx) and gonadally intact male and female 
rats were exposed to a three-week chronic stress protocol.
Following CMS, CB1 
receptor and fatty-acid-amide-hydrolase (FAAH) expression levels in the 
hippocampus were assessed by western blot analysis.
CMS reliably produced a 
downregulation of CB1 receptors ( approximately 50%) in the hippocampus of both 
gndx and intact males.
This effect was more robust in the dorsal than in the 
ventral hippocampus.
Conversely, CMS produced an upregulation of CB1 receptors ( 
approximately 150%) in the hippocampus of both gndx and intact females.
This 
upregulation was only observed in the dorsal hippocampus of female animals.
CMS 
produced an upregulation of FAAH levels in both male and female animals.
In 
non-stress control animals, males were observed to have higher CB1 levels than 
females, but no differences in FAAH were found.
These findings suggest that the 
endocannabinoid (eCB) system is preferentially organized in male and female 
animals to respond differentially to chronic stress.
These sex differences in 
the eCB system may help development of novel treatments for stress and 
depression that are designed specifically for women and men.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2009.05.013
PMCID: PMC2747651
PMID: 19460405 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reinforcement learning by Hebbian synapses with adaptive thresholds 1. Neuroscience. 1997 Nov;81(2):303-19. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(97)00118-8.

Reinforcement learning by Hebbian synapses with adaptive thresholds.

Pennartz CM(1).

Author information:
(1)California Institute of Technology
 Pasadena, USA.
A central problem in learning theory is how the vertebrate brain processes 
reinforcing stimuli in order to master complex sensorimotor tasks.
This problem 
belongs to the domain of supervised learning, in which errors in the response of 
a neural network serve as the basis for modification of synaptic connectivity in 
the network and thereby train it on a computational task.
The model presented 
here shows how a reinforcing feedback can modify synapses in a neuronal network 
according to the principles of Hebbian learning.
The reinforcing feedback steers 
synapses towards long-term potentiation or depression by critically influencing 
the rise in postsynaptic calcium, in accordance with findings on synaptic 
plasticity in mammalian brain.
An important feature of the model is the 
dependence of modification thresholds on the previous history of reinforcing 
feedback processed by the network.
The learning algorithm trained networks 
successfully on a task in which a population vector in the motor output was 
required to match a sensory stimulus vector presented shortly before.
In another 
task, networks were trained to compute coordinate transformations by combining 
different visual inputs.
The model continued to behave well when simplified 
units were replaced by single-compartment neurons equipped with several 
conductances and operating in continuous time.
This novel form of reinforcement 
learning incorporates essential properties of Hebbian synaptic plasticity and 
thereby shows that supervised learning can be accomplished by a learning rule 
similar to those used in physiologically plausible models of unsupervised 
learning.
The model can be crudely correlated to the anatomy and 
electrophysiology of the amygdala, prefrontal and cingulate cortex and has 
predictive implications for further experiments on synaptic plasticity and 
learning processes mediated by these areas.
DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4522(97)00118-8
PMID: 9300423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
PACAP-deficient mice show attenuated corticosterone secretion and fail to develop depressive behavior during chronic social defeat stress 1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2013 May;38(5):702-15. doi: 
10.1016/j.psyneuen.2012.09.006. Epub 2012 Oct 11.

PACAP-deficient mice show attenuated corticosterone secretion and fail to 
develop depressive behavior during chronic social defeat stress.

Lehmann ML(1)
 Mustafa T, Eiden AM, Herkenham M, Eiden LE.
Author information:
(1)Section on Functional Neuroanatomy, Laboratory of Cellular and Molecular 
Regulation, National Institute of Mental Health, Bethesda, MD 20892, USA.
The neuropeptide pituitary adenylate cyclase-activating polypeptide (PACAP) 
regulates activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis and the 
adrenal gland in response to various stressors.
We previously found that in 
response to acute psychological stress (restraint), elevated 
corticotrophin-releasing hormone (CRH) mRNA levels in the hypothalamic 
paraventricular nucleus (PVN) as well as elevated plasma corticosterone (CORT) 
were profoundly attenuated in PACAP-deficient mice.
To determine whether HPA 
axis responses and stress-induced depressive-like behaviors in a chronic stress 
paradigm are affected by PACAP deficiency, we subjected mice to 14 days of 
social defeat stress.
Defeat-exposed PACAP-/- mice showed a marked attenuation 
of stress-induced increases in serum CORT levels, cellular PVN ΔFosB 
immunostaining, and depressive-like behaviors (social interaction and forced 
swim tests) compared to wild-type control mice.
The PACAP-/- mice showed reduced 
PVN FosB-positive cell numbers, but relatively elevated cell counts in several 
forebrain areas including the medial prefrontal cortex, after social stress.
PACAP appears to be specific for mediating HPA activation only in psychological 
stress because marked elevations in plasma CORT after a systemic stressor 
(lipopolysaccharide administration) occurred regardless of genotype.
We conclude 
that chronically elevated CORT is a key component of depressive effects of 
social defeat, and that attenuation of the CORT response at the level of the 
PVN, as well as extrahypothalamic forebrain regions, in PACAP-deficient mice 
protects from development of depressive behavior.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.psyneuen.2012.09.006
PMCID: PMC3652373
PMID: 23062748 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: 7.
Conflict of interest None declared.
Chronic fluoxetine treatment upregulates 5‐HT uptake sites and 5‐HT<sub>2</sub> receptors in rat brain: An autoradiographic study <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>This study was undertaken to investigate the effect of chronic treatment with fluoxetine
 a selective serotonin uptake inhibitor used widely in the treatment of depression, on the distribution and density of 5‐HT uptake sites, 5‐HT<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> receptors, and vesicular amine uptake sites in rat brain.
Fluoxetine (10 mg/kg i. p.) was administered daily for 21 days.
The density of 5‐HT uptake sites labelled by [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]paroxetine, 5‐HT<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> receptors labelled by [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]ketanserin in presence of tetrabenazine and vesicular amine uptake sites labelled by [<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>H]ketanserin in the presence of mianserin were measured by quantitative autoradiography in 22 areas of rat brain, using coronal tissue sections.
Chronic administration of fluoxetine produced significant increases in the density of 5‐HT uptake sites in layers of frontoparietal cortex (by 32–43%), of striate cortex (by 55%), in CA1 field of hippocampus (by 111%) and in superior colliculus (by 20%).
Fluoxetine treatment also resulted in upregulation of 5‐HT<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> receptors in layers of frontparietal cortex (31–38%) and in CA2‐3 fields of hippocampus (by 39%).
The density of tetrabenazine‐sensitive vesicular amine uptake sites in the caudate‐putamen was also significantly increased (by 66%).
The observed alterations in 5‐HT uptake site and 5‐HT<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> receptor densities are likely a part of adaptive neuronal changes that occur after chronic administration of fluoxetine and may be related to the antidepressant effect of the drug.
© 1993 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
Theta-burst stimulation induces LTP at excitatory and inhibitory synapses in the spinal trigeminal subnucleus interpolaris 1. Neurosci Lett. 2014 Jun 27;574:1-5. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.05.019. Epub
2014  May 20.

Theta-burst stimulation induces LTP at excitatory and inhibitory synapses in the 
spinal trigeminal subnucleus interpolaris.

Song JH(1)
 Youn DH(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Oral Physiology, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National 
University, 2177 Dalgubeol Blvd, Jung-gu, Daegu 700-706, Republic of Korea.
(2)Department of Oral Physiology, School of Dentistry, Kyungpook National 
University, 2177 Dalgubeol Blvd, Jung-gu, Daegu 700-706, Republic of Korea.
Electronic address: dyoun@knu.ac.kr.
Long-lasting synaptic modifications of excitatory and inhibitory synaptic 
transmissions induced by theta-burst stimulation (TBS) were examined in the 
spinal trigeminal subnucleus interpolaris (Vi).
We found that conditioning 
afferents of another subnucleus caudalis (Vc) to the Vi with TBS produced 
long-term depression (LTD).
However, when GABAA and glycine receptors were 
blocked, the same stimulation paradigm produced long-term potentiation (LTP).
The induction of LTP involved neither NMDA receptors nor a presynaptic change.
The expression of LTP was obviously suppressed by the activation of group I 
mGluRs because its magnitude increased in the presence of antagonists for group 
I mGluRs.
Besides the LTP at excitatory synapses, TBS also induced LTP at 
inhibitory GABAergic synapses, which required the activation of NMDA receptors 
and NO-cGMP signaling but was not involved in the increase of postsynaptic 
Ca(2+) concentration.
Therefore, this study shows, for the first time, an 
activity-dependent plasticity at excitatory and inhibitory synapses in the Vi by 
the same conditioning stimulation.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2014.05.019
PMID: 24852827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of Lymphotoxin- and Lymphocyte-Mediated Cytolysis by High Molecular-Weight Dextran 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1977 Feb;154(2):215-8. doi: 10.3181/00379727-154-39640.

Inhibition of lymphotoxin- and lymphocyte-mediated cytolysis by high 
molecular-weight dextran.

Tsoukas C
 Rosenau W.

DOI: 10.3181/00379727-154-39640
PMID: 300163 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mode of action of alkylating agents using a ciliate protozoan as a model system: Part V--effect of metepa on protein synthesis in Blepharisma intermedium (Ciliata). 1. Indian J Exp Biol. 1978 Jun;16(6):632-5.

Mode of action of alkylating agents using a ciliate protozoan as a model system: 
Part V--effect of metepa on protein synthesis in Blepharisma intermedium 
(Ciliata).

Shivaji S
 Saxena DM, Pillai MK.
PMID: 100418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Tierexperimentelle Untersuchungen zum Einfluß des Lärmstresses auf die männliche Fertilität 1. Andrologia. 1976;8(2):95-100.

[Animal experimental studies on the effects of noise stress on male fertility].

[Article in German]

Günther E.

Psychic stress is able to cause male infertility. Stieve found out 
aspermatogenesis in executed men. Cockett et al. immobilized 5 Macaca-Monkeys 15 
to 40 days in capsule module under simulated space flight conditions and 
detected severe testicular degeneration. Carosi and Calabro reported about 
workers exposed to industrial noise over a period of years; the number of 
offspring was found to be much lower than in non exposed families. We examined 
the effect of noise on the fertility of 21 male guinea pigs. Sounding of 110 dB 
lasted 3-5 hours daily over a period of 22-31 days. Histological examination of 
the testicular tissue did not show any disorder of spermatogenesis. We believe 
that the negative result is attributed to failings in the test arrangement. 
Sounding only lasted for a maximum of 31 days. However
 the duration of 
spermatogenesis in guinea pigs is about 40 days.
Moreover the sounding maximum 
was only 5 hours per day, yet the time of recovery took 4-5 times longer every 
day.
Consequently the daily short-term depression of the neuroendrocrinium 
affected the gonadotropine secretion in similarity to the daily biorhythmic 
variation.
Therefore the expected inhibition of fertility by the 
neuroendrocrinic way could not be demonstrated.
Our experiments also revealed 
another problem.
In noise-exposed guinea pigs there was 8.2 per cent tubuli 
contorti without complete spermatogenesis.
Moreover, in the control group even 
9.9 per cent of the tubuli was found to be sperm-free.
It is not clear why such 
a contrary reaction occurred.
However, it is possible that hormonal stimulation 
increased temporarily as a result of noise stress.
It should be noted that this 
effect has also been reported by Arguellis.
PMID: 962176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of psychotomimetic glycolate esters on central monoamine neurons 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1972 Jan;17(1):97-102. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(72)90274-9.

The effect of psychotomimetic glycolate esters on central monoamine neurons.

Andén NE
 Corrodi H, Fuxe K.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(72)90274-9
PMID: 4401437 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reduced 5-HT<sub>1A</sub>- and GABA<sub>B</sub>Receptor Function in Dorsal Raphé Neurons Upon Chronic Fluoxetine Treatment of Socially Stressed Rats <jats:p>Autoinhibitory serotonin 1A receptors (5-HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>) in dorsal raphé nucleus (DRN) have been implicated in chronic depression and in actions of selective serotonin reuptake inhibitors (SSRI). Due to experimental limitations
 it was never studied at single-cell level whether changes in 5-HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>receptor functionality occur in depression and during SSRI treatment.
Here we address this question in a social stress paradigm in rats that mimics anhedonia, a core symptom of depression.
We used whole cell patch-clamp recordings of 5-HT- and baclophen-induced G-protein-coupled inwardly rectifying potassium (GIRK) currents as a measure of 5-HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>- and GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>receptor functionality.
5-HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>- and GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>receptor-mediated GIRK-currents were not affected in socially stressed rats, suggesting that there was no abnormal (auto)inhibition in the DRN on social stress.
However, chronic fluoxetine treatment of socially stressed rats restored anticipatory behavior and reduced the responsiveness of 5-HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>receptor-mediated GIRK currents.
Because GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>receptor-induced GIRK responses were also suppressed, fluoxetine does not appear to desensitize 5-HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>receptors but rather one of the downstream components shared with GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub>receptors.
This fluoxetine effect on GIRK currents was also present in healthy animals and was independent of the animal's “depressed” state.
Thus our data show that symptoms of depression after social stress are not paralleled by changes in 5-HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>receptor signaling in DRN neurons, but SSRI treatment can alleviate these behavioral symptoms while acting strongly on the 5-HT<jats:sub>1A</jats:sub>receptor signaling pathway.</jats:p>
Thyrocalcitonin Suppression of Hydroxyproline Release from Bone 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1968 Jan;127(1):95-9. doi: 10.3181/00379727-127-32629.

Thyrocalcitonin suppression of hydroxyproline rlease from bone.

Klein DC
 Talmage RV.
DOI: 10.3181/00379727-127-32629
PMID: 5644673 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Precisely Localized LTD in the Neocortex Revealed by Infrared-Guided Laser Stimulation <jats:p>In a direct approach to elucidate the origin of long-term depression (LTD)
 glutamate was applied onto dendrites of neurons in rat neocortical slices.
An infrared-guided laser stimulation was used to release glutamate from caged glutamate in the focal spot of an ultraviolet laser.
A burst of light flashes caused an LTD-like depression of glutamate receptor responses, which was highly confined to the region of “tetanic” stimulation (&lt;10 micrometers).
A similar depression of glutamate receptor responses was observed during LTD of synaptic transmission.
A spatially highly specific postsynaptic mechanism can account for the LTD induced by glutamate release.</jats:p>
Opiate receptor antagonism by l-prolyl-l-leucyl-glycinamide
 MIF-I 1.
Peptides.
1980 Winter;1(4):293-9. doi: 10.1016/0196-9781(80)90006-6.
Opiate receptor antagonism by L-prolyl-L-leucyl-glycinamide, MIF-I.
Dickinson SL, Slater P.

Chronic administration of 1-prolyl-l-leucyl-glycinamide (MIF-I) to mice slightly 
reduced morphine's antinociceptive activity in the hot-plate test and modified 
the biphasic motor activity response to morphine.
MIF-I antagonized the initial 
depression of activity and potentiated the increased motor activity phase.
Chronic treatment of rats with MIF-I prevented morphine's antinociceptive 
activity in the tail flick tests.
MIF-I partly antagonized the inhibition by 
morphine of the coaxially stimulated guinea-pig ileum preparation.
The 
inhibition of the ileum produced by ethylketocyclazocine was weakly antagonized 
by MIF-I.
In contrast, MIF-I had no effect on the inhibition of the stimulated 
mouse vas deferens produced by Leu-enkephalin.
The findings show that MIF-I 
weakly and selectively inhibits mu-type opiate receptors which suggests that 
MIF-I could be an endogenous inhibitor of opiate receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/0196-9781(80)90006-6
PMID: 6117839 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
An outbreak of avian influenza subtype H9N8 among chickens in South Korea 1. Avian Pathol. 2006 Dec;35(6):443-7. doi: 10.1080/03079450601009571.

An outbreak of avian influenza subtype H9N8 among chickens in South Korea.

Kwon YK(1)
 Lee YJ, Choi JG, Lee EK, Jeon WJ, Jeong OM, Kim MC, Joh SJ, Kwon JH, 
Kim JH.
Author information:
(1)National Veterinary Research and Quarantine Service, MAF, Anyang 430-824, 
Korea.
Low pathogenic avian influenza subtype H9N8 was diagnosed on a Korean native 
chicken farm in Gyeonggi province, South Korea, in late April 2004.
Clinical 
signs included moderate respiratory distress, depression, mild diarrhoea, loss 
of appetite and a slightly elevated mortality (1.4% in 5 days).
Pathologically, 
mucopurulent tracheitis and air sacculitis were prominently found with urate 
renal deposition.
The isolated A/chicken/Kr/164/04 (H9N8) had an Ala-Ser-Gly-Arg 
(A/S/G/R) motif at the cleavage site of haemagglutinin, which has been commonly 
found in H9N2 isolated from Korean poultry.
Phylogenetic analysis of the 
haemagglutinin and neuraminidase genes of the H9N8 avian influenza virus (AIV) 
isolate showed that reassortment had occurred.
Its haemagglutinin gene was 
similar to that of Korean H9N2 AIVs, but its neuraminidase gene was closely 
related to that of A/WBF/Kr/KCA16/03 (H3N8) isolated from the faeces of wild 
birds in Korea.
The pathogenicity of the isolate was tested on 6-week-old 
specific pathogen free chickens.
The inoculated virus (H9N8) was recovered from 
most tested organs, including the trachea, lung, kidney, spleen, and caecal 
tonsil.
This is the first report of an outbreak of low pathogenic avian 
influenza in chickens caused by AIV subtype H9N8.
DOI: 10.1080/03079450601009571
PMID: 17121732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Phosphorus analogs of nitrogenous drugs. II. 10H-Dibenzo[1
4]thiaphosphorins as central nervous system depressants 1.
J Med Chem.
1969 Jan;12(1):146-9. doi: 10.1021/jm00301a038.
Phosphorus analogs of nitrogenous drugs.
II.
10H-Dibenzo[1,4]thiaphosphorins as 
central nervous system depressants.
Wiley RA, Collins JH.
DOI: 10.1021/jm00301a038
PMID: 4178726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Formulation and Evaluation of Niosomal Nasal Drug Delivery System of Folic Acid for Brain Targeting 1. Curr Drug Discov Technol. 2013 Dec;10(4):270-82. doi: 
10.2174/15701638113109990031.

Formulation and evaluation of niosomal nasal drug delivery system of folic acid 
for brain targeting.

Ravouru N(1)
 Kondreddy P, Korakanchi D, Haritha M.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmaceutical Technology, Sri Padmavathi Mahila Viswavidyalayam 
(Women's university), Tirupathi-517502, A.P, India.
pallavi.kondreddy@gmail.com.
Nasal mucosa offers advantages to deliver drugs to brain via olfactory route 
thus provides rapid onset of drug action and hence faster therapeutic effect.
Therefore, various strategies have been proposed to improve the delivery of 
different drugs to brain including liposomes, colloidal drug carriers, micelles, 
chimeric peptide technology and nanotechnology through nasal route.
The low 
blood level of folates is the primary cause of depression in Alzheimer's 
disease.
Folic acid is a water soluble vitamin showing difficulty in crossing 
the blood brain barrier and thus was formulated as niosomal nasal drug delivery 
systems to target the brain.
In the present work, folic acid niosomes were 
prepared using different nonionic surfactants i.e., span 20, span 60, span 80, 
tween 20, tween 80 and cholesterol by using lipid layer hydration technique.
These were evaluated for particle size, viscosity, osmotic shock, entrapment 
efficiency and in vitro drug release.
The influence of different formulation 
variables such as surfactant type, surfactant concentration, and cholesterol 
concentration was optimized for required size distribution, viscosity, 
entrapment efficiency and in vitro release.
The prepared niosomes were in the 
size range of 3.05-5.625 µm.
Niosomes prepared with span 60 and cholesterol in 
the ratio of 1:1 (50 mg: 50 mg) shown higher entrapment efficiency of 69.42% and 
better in vitro drug release of 64.2% at the end of 12 hrs and therefore 
considered as optimized formulation.
The stability studies were carried out by 
storing niosomes at 4±1°C and 25±1°C and showed good stability over the period 
of storage.
The release of drug from niosomes followed anomalous diffusion and 
obeyed first order release kinetics.
Ex-vivo perfusion studies were also 
performed by using rat model, about 48.15% of drug was found to be absorbed 
through nasal cavity at the end of 6 hrs.
DOI: 10.2174/15701638113109990031
PMID: 23863098 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Acute urinary bladder toxicity of a polyurethane foam catalyst mixture: a possible new target organ for propionitrile derivative. 1. J Environ Pathol Toxicol. 1980 Sep;4(2-3):555-62.

Acute urinary bladder toxicity of a polyurethane foam catalyst mixture: a 
possible new target organ for propionitrile derivative.

Jaeger RJ
 Plugge H, Szabo S.

The toxicity of the mixture NIAX-ESN which contains 95% 
dimethylaminopropionitrile was evaluated in male rats.
Large doses (2.0 ml/kg 
ip) rapidly produced CNS excitation followed by depression and death.
The 
mixture (given orally as two doses of 0.31 or 0.62 ml/kg respectively) induced 
acute urinary bladder lesions in 3 days.
The changes consisted of massive 
transmural edema, acute ulcers and inflammation and, occassionally hemorrhagic 
necrosis of the bladder wall.
PMID: 7462919 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of trauma
 duration of hypotension, and resuscitation regimen on cellular immunity after hemorrhagic shock 1.
Crit Care Med.
1994 Jul;22(7):1076-83. doi: 10.1097/00003246-199407000-00005.
Effects of trauma, duration of hypotension, and resuscitation regimen on 
cellular immunity after hemorrhagic shock.
Schmand JF(1), Ayala A, Chaudry IH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824.
Comment in
    Crit Care Med.
1994 Jul;22(7):1069-70. doi: 
10.1097/00003246-199407000-00001.
OBJECTIVE: To determine the effects of: a) surgical trauma, b) crystalloid 
resuscitation, and c) different durations of hypotension on cellular immunity 
after hemorrhagic shock.
DESIGN: Prospective, multiexperimental, randomized, controlled studies.
SETTING: University research laboratory.
SUBJECTS: Inbred C3H/HeN (endotoxin-sensitive) mice, aged 6 to 7 wks, weighing 
18 to 23 g.
INTERVENTIONS: Crystalloid resuscitation, with and without blood, after 
hemorrhage.
MEASUREMENTS AND MAIN RESULTS: Mice which did or did not undergo laparotomy were 
subjected to hypotension of 35 mm Hg for 60 or 90 mins.
Crystalloid 
resuscitation with and without blood was then provided.
Animals were killed at 2 
hrs after hemorrhage and cytokine concentrations in supernatants of splenocytes, 
splenic macrophages, and serum were assessed by bioassays.
The cellular release 
of interleukin (IL)-2, IL-3, IL-6, tumor necrosis factor, and the splenocyte 
proliferative capacity were significantly and similarly depressed in all groups.
Conversely, circulating IL-6 concentrations were significantly increased in all 
groups.
CONCLUSIONS: Cellular immunity was depressed at 2 hrs after simple hemorrhage 
and no further depression occurred if hemorrhage was coupled with trauma, pure 
crystalloid resuscitation was provided, or the shock period was prolonged.
Thus, 
the early immunodepression after hemorrhage was mainly dependent on the severity 
rather than the duration of shock, resuscitation regimen, or tissue trauma.
DOI: 10.1097/00003246-199407000-00005
PMID: 8026194 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effects of sodium chloride on the esterification of leucine in transfer ribonucleic acids]. 1. Arch Int Physiol Biochim. 1967 Dec;75(5):888-9.

[Effects of sodium chloride on the esterification of leucine in transfer 
ribonucleic acids].

[Article in French]

Lurquin P.

PMID: 4173518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Continuous pulmonary C-fiber stimulation produces sustained reflex cardiovascular depression <jats:p> We used an isolated perfused in situ left lung preparation to evaluate the hemodynamic response to specific pulmonary C-fiber stimulation with capsaicin in two groups of anesthetized dogs. In one group (n = 6)
 continuous administration of capsaicin at 5 micrograms.kg-1.min-1 into the isolated pulmonary circulation produced sustained (20 min) reflex decreases in mean arterial pressure, cardiac output, maximal left ventricular rate of pressure over time, and heart rate.
These effects were abolished by vagotomy.
In a second group (n = 5) of atropinized dogs, a mild hemorrhage was first performed in each dog during control conditions (capsaicin vehicle administration).
The hemorrhage was performed by removing 10% of blood volume over 3 min and then replacing this blood 3 min later.
After reinfusion and stabilization, the mild hemorrhage was repeated during continuous administration of capsaicin (6.0 +/- 1.0 microgram.kg-1.min-1) into the isolated pulmonary circulation.
The decrease of mean arterial pressure in response to hemorrhage was significantly greater during capsaicin administration than during control conditions.
Lung denervation prevented the effect of capsaicin administration on the response to hemorrhage.
We concluded that continuous pulmonary C-fiber stimulation produces sustained cardiovascular depression and compromises the hemodynamic response to mild hemorrhage in dogs.
This latter effect may represent a central alteration of baroreflex gain.
</jats:p>
Porcine nephropathy in Europe. 1. IARC Sci Publ. 1991;(115):49-56.

Porcine nephropathy in Europe.

Hald B(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Microbiology
 Royal Veterinary and Agricultural 
University, Frederiksberg, Denmark.
Numerous surveys conducted in North America, Asia and Europe have revealed that 
ochratoxin A is a natural contaminant of plant products.
Contamination 
frequencies of up to 40% have been encountered, at levels in the range of 5-500 
micrograms/kg.
Ochratoxin A is a major causal determinant of the disease porcine 
nephropathy; but other nephrotoxic mycotoxins, such as citrinin and the fungal 
quinones, may be involved.
The disease is characterized clinically by polyuria 
and growth depression.
Renal lesions in pigs include degeneration of the 
proximal tubules, interstitial fibrosis and hyalinization of the glomeruli.
The 
disease is endemic, outbreaks being associated with bad weather conditions.
A 
positive correlation has been observed between the prevalence rates of porcine 
nephropathy and the frequency of ochratoxin A in corresponding feed samples.
Surveys for residues of ochratoxin A in kidneys from cases of porcine 
nephropathy in a number of European countries other than Denmark have 
demonstrated that 21-42% of samples contain ochratoxin A in the range of 1-100 
micrograms/kg.
PMID: 1820353 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A gamma‐aminobutyric‐acid‐mediated inhibition of neurones in the nucleus tractus solitarius of the cat. <jats:p>1. Extracellular recordings were made from 123 synaptically activated neurones in the nucleus tractus solitarius of the chloralose‐anaesthetized cat. 2. Ninety‐one neurones were activated by electrical stimulation of cardiac or pulmonary vagal branches and thirty‐two by stimulation of the aortic nerve. 3. Ionophoretic application of GABA abolished or markedly reduced the evoked or spontaneous activity of each neurone tested. These inhibitory effects were antagonized by the simultaneous ionophoretic application of bicuculline. 4. Glycine inhibited the evoked activity of 60% of neurones tested. This inhibition could be antagonized by the simultaneous application of strychnine. 5. Application of bicuculline alone increased the evoked or spontaneous activity of a large proportion of the neurones; strychnine alone had no significant effect on the evoked or spontaneous activity of the neurones. 6. These results are consistent with the hypothesis that GABA acts as an inhibitory transmitter substance within the nucleus tractus solitarius.</jats:p>
Inbreeding effect: Embryonic development and fecundity ofDrosophila melanogaster offspring 1. Experientia. 1978 Oct 15;34(10):1273-4. doi: 10.1007/BF01981412.

Inbreeding effect: embryonic development and fecundity of Drosophila 
melanogaster offspring.

Biémont C
 Bouletreau-Merle J.

Inbreeding depression observed on fecundity of adult Drosophila depends on the 
effect observed during development of the eggs laid by their parents.
This 
depression does not then depend on the homozygosity per se of the adult genome.
It is mainly due to the deleterious effect observed primarily during 
embryogenesis.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01981412
PMID: 104884 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Modification of the bone marrow toxicity of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) in mice by diethyldithiocarbamate. 1. Cancer Res. 1984 Sep;44(9):3686-90.

Modification of the bone marrow toxicity of cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) in 
mice by diethyldithiocarbamate.

Evans RG
 Wheatley C, Engel C, Nielsen J, Ciborowski LJ.
It has been shown that cis-platinum-induced nephrotoxicity in rats can be 
inhibited by diethyldithiocarbamate (DDC).
We report here the bone marrow 
protective properties of DDC in hybrid (C57BL X BALB/c) mice exposed to single 
and fractionated doses of cis-platinum.
Relatively nontoxic doses of DDC afford 
maximum protection, using that dose of cis-platinum that would result in the 
death of 50% of the mice within 9 days as an end point (dose-limiting gut 
toxicity in mice), when injected 0.5 to 2 hr following i.p.
cis-platinum 
treatment.
Survivals of colony-forming units in spleen, nucleated bone marrow 
cells, and peripheral white blood cell were used to assess the bone marrow 
protective properties of DDC following both single and fractionated doses of 
cis-platinum.
A dose modification factor of 3.2 (based on colony-forming units 
in spleen survival) was obtained when DDC (1000 mg/kg) was injected into mice 
0.5 hr after graded doses of cis-platinum.
When fractionated doses of 
cis-platinum were used (6 mg/kg on Days 0, 10, 20, and 30), the survival of 
colony-forming units in spleen was markedly enhanced if the animals were rescued 
with DDC 0.5 hr following each cis-platinum dose.
When bone marrow cellularity 
was measured immediately before and 2 days after each dose of cis-platinum, a 
similar pattern of depression and recovery was noted whether DDC was present or 
not; however, the depression was less marked in mice rescued with DDC.
When 
peripheral white blood cell counts were monitored, the nadir and recovery were 
similar in the presence or absence of DDC; however, recovery occurred sooner in 
the animals that had received DDC.
Our data support the ability of DDC to modify 
the bone marrow toxicity of cis-platinum in normal mice.
Experiments are in 
progress in tumor-bearing animals exploring the differential protection afforded 
by DDC between bone marrow and tumor.
PMID: 6331656 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The influence of aging on poststroke depression using a rat model via middle cerebral artery occlusion 1. Cogn Affect Behav Neurosci. 2013 Dec;13(4):847-59. doi: 
10.3758/s13415-013-0177-3.

The influence of aging on poststroke depression using a rat model via middle 
cerebral artery occlusion.

Boyko M(1)
 Kutz R, Gruenbaum BF, Cohen H, Kozlovsky N, Gruenbaum SE, Shapira Y, 
Zlotnik A.
Author information:
(1)Division of Anesthesiology and Critical Care, Soroka Medical Center, Faculty 
of Health Sciences, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev, Beer-Sheva, 84101, 
Israel, matthewboykoresearch@gmail.com.
Poststroke depression (PSD) is the most frequent psychological sequela following 
stroke.
While previous studies describe the impact of age on brain infarct 
volume, brain edema, and blood-brain barrier (BBB) breakdown following ischemia, 
the role of age on PSD has yet to be described.
Here, we examine the influence 
of age on PSD progression in a rat model of PSD by middle cerebral artery 
occlusion (MCAO).
One hundred forty-three rats were divided into three groups.
48 rats 20 weeks of age underwent a sham procedure, 51 rats 20 weeks of age had 
MCAO, and 44 rats 22-26 months of age had MCAO.
Groups were further divided into 
two subgroups.
The first subgroup was used to measure infarct lesion volume, 
brain edema, and BBB breakdown at 24 h. In the second subgroup at 3 weeks after 
MCAO, rats were subjected to a sucrose preference test, two-way shuttle 
avoidance task, forced swimming test, and a brain-derived neurotrophic factor 
(BDNF) protein level measurement.
Total and striatal infarct volume, brain 
edema, and BBB breakdown in the striatum were increased in older rats, as 
compared with younger rats.
While both old and young rats exhibited 
depressive-like behaviors on each of the behavioral tests and lower BDNF levels 
post-MCAO, as compared with control rats, there were no differences between old 
and young rats.
Although older rats suffered from larger infarct volumes, 
increased brain edema and more BBB disruption following MCAO, the lack of 
behavioral differences between young and old rats suggests that there was no 
effect of rat age on the incidence of PSD.
DOI: 10.3758/s13415-013-0177-3
PMID: 23761136 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
10-(Alkylamino)-4H-thieno[3
4-b][1,5]benzodiazepines.
A novel class of potential neuroleptic agents 1.
J Med Chem.
1979 Jun;22(6):725-31. doi: 10.1021/jm00192a020.
10-(Alkylamino)-4H-thieno[3,4-b][1,5]benzodiazepines.
A novel class of potential 
neuroleptic agents.
Press JB, Hofmann CM, Eudy NH, Fanshawe WJ, Day IP, Greenblatt EN, Safir SR.

An investigation of the structural requirements for CNS activity of the title 
compounds was undertaken.
A synthesis of the precursor 
dihydro-10H-thieno[3,4-b][1,5]benzodiazepin-10-ones was achieved and three 
routes for their conversion to the title compounds were developed.
The compounds 
were tested for neuroleptic activity by means of the blockade or d-amphetamine 
lethality in aggregated mice and/or effects on locomotor activity in rats.
Antidepressant activity was examined using inhibition of tetrabenazine-induced 
depression in mice.
Most of the compounds were found to be potent neuroleptic 
agents with several exhibiting additional antidepressant activity.
DOI: 10.1021/jm00192a020
PMID: 37338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The Na
K pump regulates a decrease in the cholinosensitivity of the neurons in the snail Helix lucorum taurica Kryn in a cellular analog of habituation: its dependence on intracellular calcium].
1.
Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlova.
2000 Sep-Oct;50(5):855-66.
[The Na,K pump regulates a decrease in the cholinosensitivity of the neurons in 
the snail Helix lucorum taurica Kryn in a cellular analog of habituation: its 
dependence on intracellular calcium].
[Article in Russian]

Pivovarov AS(1), Boguslavskiĭ DV.
Author information:
(1)Department of Higher Nervous Activity, Lomonosov State University, Moscow.
In Helix lucorum snail we studied the effects of ouabain, inhibitor of 
Na,K-pump, on the depression of cholinosensitivity in command neurons of 
withdrawal behavior and the role of the intracellular free Ca2+.
The cellular 
analog of the negative learning (habituation) was used Transmembrane integral 
inward currents were recorded from the identified LPa2, LPa3, RPa3, and RPa2 
neurons in ganglia preparation using two-electrode voltage clamp technique.
Acetylcholine (ACh) was locally applied iontophoretically.
Reduction of neuronal 
cholinosensitivity was estimated as a depth of depression of the ACh-induced 
inward current during rhythmic local application of ACh (interstimulus interval 
of 1-3 min) onto the somatic membrane.
Bath application of ouabain (0.1 mM) 
produced an increase in depression in one group of neurons and its decrease in 
another group.
After 60-150 min of spontaneous diffusion of a calcium ion 
chelator BAPTA (1 mM) from the intracellular microelectrode, ouabain produced 
only the increase in depression.
If CaCl2 (100 mM) was added to the solution of 
the voltage-recording intracellular microelectrode, 60 min later ouabain 
produced only the reduction of the depression of the ACh current.
The conclusion 
is drawn that the inhibition of the Na,K-pump by ouabain modifies the depression 
of neuronal cholinosensitivity in the cellular analog of habituation.
The 
direction of the modulatory effect depends on the basal concentration of the 
intracellular free Ca2+.
PMID: 11085001 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Immunization of Chickens Against Coccidiosis with Extracts of Eimeria-Infected Tissues 1. Poult Sci. 1986 May;65(5):892-7. doi: 10.3382/ps.0650892.

Immunization of chickens against coccidiosis with extracts of Eimeria-infected 
tissues.

McKenzie ME
 Long PL.
Immunization of chickens with extracts prepared from Eimeria-infected tissues 
was attempted.
Significant protection against weight depression was conferred 
when chickens were inoculated intra-abdominally with tissue extracts prepared 
from ceca infected with two different strains of E. tenella.
When extracts were 
given intravenously, with or without the adjuvant, polyandenylic-polyuridylic 
acid, weight depression was not ameliorated after challenge.
Experiments using 
extracts from two strains of E. acervulina- and E. maxima- and one strain of E. 
brunetti-infected tissues failed to protect against weight gain depression after 
challenge.
DOI: 10.3382/ps.0650892
PMID: 3725726 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of the Serotonin Agonists 8-OH-DPAT
 Buspirone, and DOI on Water Maze Performance 1.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav.
1998 Mar;59(3):729-35. doi: 
10.1016/s0091-3057(97)00553-4.
Effects of the serotonin agonists 8-OH-DPAT, buspirone, and DOI on water maze 
performance.
Kant GJ(1), Wylie RM, Chu K, Ghosh S.

Author information:
(1)Division of Neurosciences, Walter Reed Army Institute of Research, 
Washington, DC 20307-5100, USA.
We have previously reported that the serotonin 5-HT1A agonist 8-OH-DPAT and the 
5-HT2c agonist TFMPP impair performance on a water maze.
In the present report 
we extended those studies by examining a second 5-HT1A agonist, buspirone, to 
see whether its effects paralleled those of 8-OH-DPAT, and by testing the 
effects of the 5-HT2 agonist DOI.
Unlike the open pool Morris water maze, the 
maze used in these experiments has alleys and doorways.
The maze can be easily 
reconfigured to present rats with both previously learned or new maze 
challenges.
Performance is assessed by time to reach the maze exit platform and 
the number of wrong doorways entered (errors).
At doses that did not affect 
performance in a previously learned maze, the 5-HT1A agonists 8-OH-DPAT (0.1 
mg/kg) and buspirone (1 mg/kg) slowed acquisition of a new maze configuration as 
measured by both swim time to the exit platform and errors committed.
A higher 
dose of buspirone (10 mg/kg) completely blocked acquisition of a novel maze.
In 
contrast.
DOI slowed performance as assessed by swim time on both a well-learned 
maze as well as acquisition of a new maze, but did not affect error rate on 
either task, suggesting that this 5-HT2 agonist impaired performance by 
depressing motor activity.
These experiments demonstrate that serotonin 
agonists, especially the 5-HT1A subtype, can impair learning.
DOI: 10.1016/s0091-3057(97)00553-4
PMID: 9512079 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Deep brain stimulation in treatment-resistant depression in mice: Comparison with the CRF1 antagonist
 SSR125543 1.
Prog Neuropsychopharmacol Biol Psychiatry.
2013 Jan 10;40:213-20. doi: 
10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.07.019.
Deep brain stimulation in treatment-resistant depression in mice: comparison 
with the CRF1 antagonist, SSR125543.
Dournes C(1), Beeské S, Belzung C, Griebel G.

Author information:
(1)Sanofi, Exploratory Unit, Chilly-Mazarin, France.
Deep brain stimulation (DBS) has been demonstrated to represent a targeted 
therapeutic alternative for treatment-resistant depression.
In this study, we 
used the unpredictable chronic mild stress (UCMS) test to validate 
high-frequency electrical stimulation of the cingulate cortex (CC) as a possible 
treatment to improve behavioral symptoms associated with a depressive-like state 
in treatment-resistant mice.
The effects of DBS were compared with those of the 
CRF(1) antagonist, SSR125543.
Mice were subjected to UCMS, which consisted of 
the sequential and unpredictable application of mild stressors for a total of 8 
weeks.
From week 4 until the end of week 6, mice received either a saline 
injection or were treated with the antidepressant, fluoxetine (10 mg/kg, i.p.).
At the end of week 6, fluoxetine-treated mice were subdivided into two 
populations, that is one responding to fluoxetine, and one not responding, based 
on their fur coat state, an index of depressive-like state in this test.
Non-responders were subsequently subjected to bilateral DBS (at 80 or 120 Hz, 
1-h/day) or were treated with SSR125543 (20 mg/kg, i.p.)
for two weeks.
Stimulation of the CC at 120 Hz in treatment-resistant mice resulted in a 
normalization of motivated-like responses, anxiety-related behaviors, 
hyperactivity and aggressiveness.
SSR125543 improved motivated-like and 
aggressive behaviors.
These findings demonstrate that bilateral DBS of the CC 
and, to a lesser extent, pharmacological blockade of the CRF(1) receptor in 
treatment-resistant mice can attenuate several aspects of depressive-like 
behaviors, suggesting further that these approaches may represent valid 
alternatives for the treatment of drug-resistant depressed and/or anxious 
patients.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pnpbp.2012.07.019
PMID: 23367508 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of dibenzepine and imipramine on the isolated rat heart 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1971 May;14(4):333-9. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(71)90186-5.

Effects of dibenzepine and imipramine on the isolated rat heart.

Langslet A
 Johansen WG, Ryg M, Skomedal T, Oye I.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(71)90186-5
PMID: 5157764 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Intranasally Applied Neuropeptide S Shifts a High-Anxiety Electrophysiological Endophenotype in the Ventral Hippocampus towards a "Normal"-Anxiety One 1. PLoS One. 2015 Apr 1;10(4):e0120272. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120272. 
eCollection 2015.

Intranasally applied neuropeptide S shifts a high-anxiety electrophysiological 
endophenotype in the ventral hippocampus towards a "normal"-anxiety one.

Dine J(1)
 Ionescu IA(2), Avrabos C(2), Yen YC(2), Holsboer F(2), Landgraf R(2), 
Schmidt U(2), Eder M(1).
Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany; Department Stress 
Neurobiology and Neurogenetics, Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, 
Germany.
(2)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.
The neurobiological basis of pathological anxiety and the improvement of its 
pharmacological treatment are a matter of intensive investigation.
Here, using 
electrophysiological techniques in brain slices from animals of the high 
anxiety-related behavior (HAB) and normal anxiety-related behavior (NAB) mouse 
model, we show that basal neurotransmission at ventral hippocampal CA3-CA1 
synapses is weaker in HAB compared to NAB mice.
We further demonstrate that 
paired-pulse facilitation (PPF) and long-term potentiation (LTP) at these 
synapses are more pronounced in slices from HAB animals.
Based on previous 
findings, we also examined whether intranasal delivery of neuropeptide S (NPS), 
which increasingly emerges as a potential novel treatment option for anxiety 
symptoms occurring in a variety of diseases like anxiety disorders, 
posttraumatic stress disorder, and major depression, impacts on the high-anxiety 
electrophysiological endophenotype in HAB mice.
Strikingly, we detected enhanced 
basal neurotransmission and reduced PPF and LTP in slices from NPS-treated HAB 
animals.
Collectively, our study uncovers a multifaceted high-anxiety 
neurophysiological endophenotype in the murine ventral hippocampus and provides 
the first evidence that an intranasally applied neuropeptide can shift such an 
endophenotype in an anxiety-regulating brain structure towards a 
"normal"-anxiety one.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0120272
PMCID: PMC4382147
PMID: 25830625 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: U. Schmidt, F. Holsboer, 
I.A.
Ionescu, R. Landgraf and Y.C.
Yen declare a conflict of interest due to a 
pending patent application on intranasal application of NPS (Yen YC, Steiger A, 
Holsboer F, Landgraf R, Ionescu IA and Schmidt U.
(inventors).
Peptides and 
pharmaceutical compositions for use in intranasal treatment of patients 
suffering from anxiety and sleep disorders).
Patent Application 
PCT/EP2012/056002 published October 4th, 2012.
This does not alter the authors' 
adherence to PLOS ONE policies on sharing data and materials.
Synaptic long-term depression (LTD) in vivo recorded on the rat cerebellar cortex. 1. Arch Ital Biol. 2002 Jan;140(1):1-12.

Synaptic long-term depression (LTD) in vivo recorded on the rat cerebellar 
cortex.

Vigot R(1)
 Batini C, Kado RT, Yamamori T.

Author information:
(1)Division of Speciation Mechanisms I, National Institute for Basic Biology, 
Nishigonaka 38, Myodaiji, Okazaki, 444-8585, Japan.
Long-Term Depression (LTD) of the parallel fiber synapses of the cerebellar 
cortex has been intensively studied over the last 20 years and is now considered 
to be a physiological mechanism underlying learning and memory of the cerebellar 
cortex.
With microelectrode recording in vivo, the induced LTD is recorded 
reliably up to 2 hours.
Using surface electrodes we have recorded parallel fiber 
responses due to the currents generated by the AMPA type receptors of the 
dendritic spines in the intact vermal cortex of decerebrated rats.
We have found 
that by conjunctively stimulating the climbing and parallel fiber pathways, an 
LTD was induced which persisted for as long as the recording conditions 
permitted.
The longest lasting LTD of our present results was for 5 hours.
PMID: 11889918 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Individual Cerebellar Purkinje Cells Express Different cGMP Phosphodiesterases (PDEs):<i>In Vivo</i>Phosphorylation of cGMP-Specific PDE (PDE5) as an Indicator of cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) Activation <jats:p>The nitric oxide (NO)-cGMP pathway has been implicated as playing a crucial role in the induction of cerebellar long-term depression (LTD). The amplitude and duration of the cGMP signal is controlled by cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterases (PDEs). Here we identify PDE5 and PDE1B as the two major cGMP-hydrolyzing PDEs specifically and differentially expressed in the Purkinje neurons of mouse cerebellum. PDE5 was found in all Purkinje neurons
 whereas PDE1B was detected only in a subset of these cells, suggesting that individual Purkinje cells may differentially regulate cGMP, depending on the PDE isozymes expressed.</jats:p><jats:p>Although expression of guanylate cyclase and/or cGMP-dependent protein kinase (PKG) in Purkinje cells have been reported, neither cGMP accumulation nor PKG activation in these cells<jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>has been demonstrated.
To determine if changes in PKG activation and PDE5 regulation occur<jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>we have examined the phosphorylation of PDE5 in mouse cerebellar Purkinje cells by immunocytochemistry and Western blot analyses using a phosphospecific PDE5 antibody.
Injection of sodium nitroprusside or selective PKG activators into the lateral ventricle of mouse brain induced PDE5 phosphorylation<jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>, but was completely missing in Purkinje cell-specific PKG I knock-out mice.
In cerebellar slices, treatment with sildenafil or IBMX led to different levels of phospho-PDE5 accumulation and activation of PDE5.
These results suggest that phosphorylation of PDE5 in Purkinje neurons after cGMP-PKG activation performs a critical role in the termination of the cGMP signal during LTD progression; moreover, PDE5 phosphorylation may be used as an<jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>indicator for PKG activation.</jats:p>
Chronic unpredicted mild stress-induced depression alter saxagliptin pharmacokinetics and CYP450 activity in GK rats <jats:p><jats:bold>Background.</jats:bold>This study was to explore the pharmacokinetics of saxagliptin (Sax) in Goto–Kakizaki (GK) rats complicated with depression induced by chronic unpredicted mild stress (CUMS). The comorbidity of diabetic patients with depression is becoming more and more epidemic. Whether depression mental disorder alters the pharmacokinetics of hypoglycemic drugs in diabetes patients is not clear.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Methods.</jats:bold>Five-week-old male GK rats were kept in the cage for 7 weeks in a specific pathogen free (SPF)-grade lab until the emergence of diabetes and were then divided into two groups: control group and depression model group. Rats in the CUMS-induced depression group were exposed to a series of stressors for 8 weeks. Plasma serotonin and dopamine levels and behavior of open-field test were used to confirm the establishment of the depression model. All rats were given 0.5 mg/kg Sax orally after 8 weeks and blood samples were collected at different time points. The Sax concentration was assayed by high performance liquid chromatography-tandem mass spectrometry (HPLC-MS/MS). The CYP450 activity of the liver microsomes was determined by using cocktails of probe drugs in which the activities of CYP enzymes were assessed through the determination of the production of the probe drugs.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Results.</jats:bold>Statistically significant differences in Sax pharmacokinetics were observed for area under curve
 clearance, peak concentration, peak time and mean residence time between the depression rats and the control rats, while no statistical differences were observed for half-time and distribution volume by HPLC-MS/MS analysis.
The CYP450 activity had different changes in the depression group.</jats:p><jats:p><jats:bold>Conclusions.</jats:bold>These results indicated that CUMS-induced depression alters the drug metabolic process of Sax and CYP450 activity of the liver microsomal enzymes in GK rats.</jats:p>
Chronic dietary lithium induces increased levels of myo-inositol-1-phosphatase activity in rat cerebral cortex homogenates 1. Brain Res. 1986 Aug 20;380(2):401-4. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(86)90245-3.

Chronic dietary lithium induces increased levels of myo-inositol-1-phosphatase 
activity in rat cerebral cortex homogenates.

Renshaw PF
 Joseph NE, Leigh JS Jr.
The monovalent lithium ion inhibits the enzyme myo-inositol-1-phosphatase at 
concentrations comparable to those which are useful in the treatment of manic 
depressive illness.
However, dialyzed cortical homogenates from rats which have 
been fed diets containing lithium carbonate demonstrate increased 
myo-inositol-1-phosphate phosphatase activity.
Over a 4-week period, there is an 
approximate doubling of the lithium-sensitive myo-inositol-1-phosphatase 
activity in the homogenate.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(86)90245-3
PMID: 3019470 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Decreased hepatic vitamin A after drug administration in men and in rats 1. Am J Clin Nutr. 1984 Dec;40(6):1131-6. doi: 10.1093/ajcn/40.6.1131.

Decreased hepatic vitamin A after drug administration in men and in rats.

Leo MA
 Lowe N, Lieber CS.
Eleven patients with moderate drug-induced liver changes were found to have 
extremely low hepatic vitamin A levels (less than 10% of normal).
Their serum 
vitamin A, retinol-binding protein, and transthyretin were only slightly 
affected.
In rats, two representative drugs (phenobarbital and 
methylcholanthrene) produced a significant depression of hepatic vitamin A, 
whereas plasma vitamin A levels remained normal.
The livers of drug-treated 
animals showed no abnormalities except for the expected proliferation of the 
smooth endoplasmic reticulum and induction of microsomal enzymes and cytochrome 
P-450 (phenobarbital) and P-448 (methylcholanthrene).
These findings suggest 
that the decrease in hepatic vitamin A may be secondary, at least in part, to 
enhanced microsomal metabolism.
DOI: 10.1093/ajcn/40.6.1131
PMID: 6507338 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Population genetics after fragmentation: the case of the endangered Spanish imperial eagle (<i>Aquila adalberti</i>) <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The highly endangered Spanish imperial eagle
<jats:italic>Aquila adalberti</jats:italic>, has suffered from both population decline and fragmentation during the last century.
Here we describe the current genetic status of the population using an extensive sampling of its current distribution range and both mitochondrial control region sequences and nuclear microsatellite markers.
Results were evaluated in comparison to those obtained for the Eastern imperial eagle,<jats:italic>Aquila heliaca</jats:italic>, its nearest extant relative.
Mitochondrial haplotype diversity was lower in the Spanish than in the Eastern species whereas microsatellite allelic richness and expected heterozygosity did not differ.
Both allelic richness and expected heterozygosity were lower in the small Parque Nacional de Doñana breeding nucleus compared to the remaining nuclei.
A signal for a recent genetic bottleneck was not detected in the current Spanish imperial eagle population.
We obtained low but significant pairwise<jats:italic>F</jats:italic><jats:sub>ST</jats:sub>values that were congruent with a model of isolation by distance.<jats:italic>F</jats:italic><jats:sub>ST</jats:sub>and exact tests showed differentiation among the peripheral and small Parque Nacional de Doñana population and the remaining breeding subgroups.
The centrally located Montes de Toledo population did not differ from the surrounding Centro, Extremadura and Sierra Morena populations whereas the latter were significantly differentiated.
On the other hand, a Bayesian approach identified two groups, Parque Nacional de Doñana and the rest of breeding nuclei.
Recent migration rates into and from Parque Nacional de Doñana and the rest of breeding nuclei were detected by assignment methods and estimated as 2.4 and 5.7 individuals per generation, respectively, by a Bayesian approach.
We discuss how management strategies should aim at the maintenance of current genetic variability levels and the avoidance of inbreeding depression through the connection of the different nuclei.</jats:p>
Unlike 2-deoxy-d-glucose
 3-O-methyl-d-glucose does not induce long-term potentiation in rat hippocampal slices 1.
Brain Res.
2001 Mar 23;895(1-2):250-2. doi: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02077-7.
Unlike 2-deoxy-D-glucose, 3-O-methyl-D-glucose does not induce long-term 
potentiation in rat hippocampal slices.
Xu YZ(1), Krnjevic K.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, University of Science and Technology, Hefei, Anhui 
23002, China.
Equimolar replacement of 10 mM glucose by 2-deoxy-D-glucose (2-DG) causes 
substantial depression followed by a sharp and sustained potentiation of CA1 
field EPSPs.
In the present experiments, similar applications of 
3-O-methyl-D-glucose, which is also taken up by cells but is not phosphorylated, 
had only a weak blocking action and elicited no potentiation.
Possible 
explanations for the marked effects of 2-DG include a more rapid block of 
glycolysis and the production of phosphorylated derivatives of 2-DG.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-8993(01)02077-7
PMID: 11259785 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Anthramycin
 a new type of DNA-inhibiting antibiotic: Reaction with DNA and effect on nucleic acid synthesis in mouse leukemia cells 1.
Biochim Biophys Acta.
1968 Jan 29;155(1):121-9. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2787(68)90342-0.
Anthramycin, a new type of DNA-inhibiting antibiotic: reaction with DNA and 
effect on nucleic acid synthesis in mouse leukemia cells.
Kohn KW, Bono VH Jr, Kann HE Jr.

DOI: 10.1016/0005-2787(68)90342-0
PMID: 5647054 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
CyPPA
 a positive modulator of small-conductance Ca<sup>2+</sup>-activated K<sup>+</sup> channels, inhibits phasic uterine contractions and delays preterm birth in mice <jats:p> Organized uterine contractions, including those necessary for parturition, are dependent on calcium entry through voltage-gated calcium channels in myometrial smooth muscle cells.
Recent evidence suggests that small-conductance Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>-activated potassium channels (K<jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub>2), specifically isoforms K<jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub>2.2 and 2.3, may control these contractions through negative feedback regulation of Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> entry.
We tested whether selective pharmacologic activation of K<jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub>2.2/2.3 channels might depress uterine contractions, providing a new strategy for preterm labor intervention.
Western blot analysis and immunofluorescence microscopy revealed expression of both K<jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub>2.2 and K<jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub>2.3 in the myometrium of nonpregnant (NP) and pregnant (gestation day 10 and 16; D10 and D16, respectively) mice.
Spontaneous phasic contractions of isolated NP, D10, and D16 uterine strips were all suppressed by the K<jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub>2.2/2.3-selective activator CyPPA in a concentration-dependent manner.
This effect was antagonized by the selective K<jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub>2 inhibitor apamin.
Whereas CyPPA sensitivity was reduced in D10 and D16 versus NP strips (pIC<jats:sub>50</jats:sub> 5.33 ± 0.09, 4.64 ± 0.03, 4.72 ± 0.10, respectively), all contractions were abolished between 30 and 60 μM.
Blunted contractions were associated with CyPPA depression of spontaneous Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> events in myometrial smooth muscle bundles.
Augmentation of uterine contractions with oxytocin or prostaglandin F<jats:sub>2α</jats:sub> did not reduce CyPPA sensitivity or efficacy.
Finally, in an RU486-induced preterm labor model, CyPPA significantly delayed time to delivery by 3.4 h and caused a 2.5-fold increase in pup retention.
These data indicate that pharmacologic stimulation of myometrial K<jats:sub>Ca</jats:sub>2.2/2.3 channels effectively suppresses Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>-mediated uterine contractions and delays preterm birth in mice, supporting the potential utility of this approach in tocolytic therapies.
</jats:p>
Inhibitory effect of histamine on tissue respiration of the heart muscle "in vitro". 1. Acta Physiol Pol. 1970;21(3):271-4.

Inhibitory effect of histamine on tissue respiration of the heart muscle "in 
vitro".

Stazka W.

PMID: 5516394 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Haemothorax associated with <i>Angiostrongylus vasorum </i>infection in a dog <jats:p> <jats:bold>Angiostrongylosis was diagnosed in a dog presenting with haemothorax on the basis of detection of <jats:italic>Angiostrongylus vasorum </jats:italic>first‐stage larvae both in the pleural effusion and in faeces. A one‐year‐old
 male, mixed‐breed dog was presented with fever, depression and persistent cough of one month’s duration.
Clinical examination revealed temperature of 39·5°C, loud bronchovesicular sounds on thoracic auscultation and attenuated cardiac sounds.
Thoracic radiographs showed a moderate bilateral pleural effusion and a diffuse interstitial pulmonary pattern, with an alveolar pattern in one lobe.
Routine haematology revealed anaemia and leucocytosis with eosinophilia, basophilia and thrombocytopenia.
Coagulation assays showed a consumptive coagulopathy resembling disseminated intravascular coagulation.
The relationship between haemothorax and the presence of <jats:italic>A vasorum </jats:italic>larvae in the pleural effusion is discussed.
The dog was successfully treated with fenbendazole until negative for larvae on faecal examination.
This case report indicates that <jats:italic>A vasorum </jats:italic>infection should be considered as a possible aetiological cause of haemothorax in dogs.</jats:bold> </jats:p>
Reactivity of 5-HT1A receptor in adult rats after neonatal noradrenergic neurons' lesion — Implications for antidepressant-like action 1. Brain Res. 2008 Nov 6;1239:66-76. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.054. Epub
2008  Aug 29.

Reactivity of 5-HT1A receptor in adult rats after neonatal noradrenergic 
neurons' lesion--implications for antidepressant-like action.

Dabrowska J(1)
 Nowak P, Brus R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Medical University of Silesia, 38 Jordana St., 
41-808 Zabrze, Poland.
jdabrow@emory.edu

The aim of this study was to assess the 5-HT1A receptor reactivity after 
neonatal noradrenergic neurons' lesion.
DSP-4 
(N-(2-chloroethyl)-N-ethyl-2-bromobenzylamine), 50 mg/kg, was administered 30 
min after a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI)--zimelidine (10 mg/kg) 
on the 1st and 3rd day of life.
Zimelidine was used to prevent serotonin (5-HT) 
depletion.
5-HT1A autoreceptor is involved in the regulation of 5-HT release as 
well as the pathogenesis of depression.
During a microdialysis study of 
anaesthetized rats, the 5-HT1A receptor agonist, R-(+)-8-OH-DPAT (0.1 mg/kg), 
decreased 5-HT release in the medial prefrontal cortex of control rats but this 
effect was significantly attenuated in DSP-4-treated animals (10-12 weeks old).
To further determine which type of receptor, either pre or postsynaptically 
located, is involved in the attenuated response to the 5-HT1A receptor agonist 
in lesioned rats, behavioral tests were conducted.
In the forced swimming test, 
DSP-4 treated rats after saline injection, displayed shorter immobility time in 
comparison to control rats.
R-(+)-8-OH-DPAT (0.5 mg/kg) evoked an 
antidepressant-like effect in control and DSP-4 treated rats in a learned 
helplessness paradigm as well as the forced swimming test.
The results of this 
study provided further support for the exclusive desensitization of 5-HT1A 
autoreceptor in adult rats with neonatal lesion of the central noradrenergic 
system.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.054
PMID: 18789911 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Urinary Oestrogens in Heifers Treated with Prednisolone During the Oestrous Cycle 1. Acta Vet Scand. 1976;17(3):376-8. doi: 10.1186/BF03547920.

Urinary oestrogens in heifers treated with prednisolone during the oestrous 
cycle.

Tomasgard G(1).

Author information:
(1)The Department of Reproductive Physiology and Pathology
 Veterinary College 
of Norway, P.O.Box 8146, Oslo Dep., Oslo 1, Norway

Heiferis treated with a glucocorticoid during the oestrous cycle, displayed 
increased follicular activity and small corpora lutea compared to untreated 
controls (Tomasgard 1976a), but showed no signs of oestrogen production during 
the treatment.
DOI: 10.1186/BF03547920
PMCID: PMC8383937
PMID: 988739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cardiovascular actions of Salbutamol
 a new bronchodilator 1.
Nihon Yakurigaku Zasshi.
1972 Jan;68(1):73-85.
[Cardiovascular action of Salbutamol].
[Article in Japanese]

Oshima T, Koike H, Nakayama K, Takagi H.

PMID: 5065041 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Contribution of Ca2+-influx to generation of the transient inward current in guinea-pig ventricular muscles. 1. Jpn J Physiol. 1987;37(3):479-96. doi: 10.2170/jjphysiol.37.479.

Contribution of Ca2+-influx to generation of the transient inward current in 
guinea-pig ventricular muscles.

Hiraoka M(1)
 Kawano S, Kinoshita H.

Author information:
(1)Department of Cardiovascular Diseases, Tokyo Medical and Dental University, 
Japan.
Contribution of Ca2+-influx via the slow channel to generation of the transient 
inward current in guinea-pig ventricular muscles was studied using a single 
sucrose gap voltage clamp technique.
The transient inward current (TI) was 
induced from superfusion of the preparations with the low-K+ (0 mM), high-Ca2+ 
(3.6 mM) solution.
Application of 2 mM-CO2+ quickly and reversibly suppressed 
the TI amplitude to 25% of the control and delayed its peak timing to 153% 
during 10-20 min.
Inhibition developed as quickly as Co2+ suppressed the slow 
inward current (Is), and its recovery took place without apparent time lag 
behind its effect on Is.
The block of both TI and Is by Co2+ was antagonized by 
raising external Ca2+ to 7.2 mM.
Removal of external Ca2+ caused a prompt 
suppression of both Is and TI.
Application of 2 or 5 mM-procaine HCl produced a 
complete abolition of TI with a mild depression of Is.
While 1 mM-caffeic caused 
a suppression of TI after a transient augmentation, 10 mM-caffeine completely 
eliminated it without abolishing Is.
These results indicate that the Ca2+-influx 
through the slow channel acts not only to load the cell with those ions, but 
also to influence somehow the Ca2+-release from the stores under the 
Ca2+-overloaded conditions.
DOI: 10.2170/jjphysiol.37.479
PMID: 2446033 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Epidural administration of liposome-encapsulated hydromorphone provides extended analgesia in a rodent model of stifle arthritis. 1. J Am Assoc Lab Anim Sci. 2011 Jul;50(4):507-12.

Epidural administration of liposome-encapsulated hydromorphone provides extended 
analgesia in a rodent model of stifle arthritis.

Schmidt JR(1)
 Krugner-Higby L, Heath TD, Sullivan R, Smith LJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgical Sciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Wisconsin, Madison, Wisconsin, USA.
Liposome encapsulation of opioids by using an ammonium-sulfate-gradient loading 
technique significantly slows the release time of the drug.
This study evaluated 
the duration of analgesia in a rodent model of monoarthritis after epidural 
administration of liposome-encapsulated hydromorphone (LE-hydromorphone; 
prepared by ammonium-sulfate-gradient loading) compared with standard 
hydromorphone and a negative control of blank liposomes.
Analgesia was assessed 
by changes in thermal withdrawal latency, relative weight-bearing, and 
subjective behavioral scoring.
Analgesia in arthritic rats was short-lived after 
epidural hydromorphone; increases in pain threshold were observed only at 2 h 
after administration.
In contrast, thermal pain thresholds after epidural 
LE-hydromorphone were increased for as long as 72 h, and subjective lameness 
scores were lower for as long as 96 h after epidural administration.
Injection 
of LE-hydromorphone epidurally was associated with various mild changes in CNS 
behavior, and 2 rats succumbed to respiratory depression and death.
In 
conclusion, LE-hydromorphone prolonged the duration of epidural analgesia 
compared with the standard formulation of hydromorphone, but CNS side effects 
warrant careful administration of this LE-hydromorphone in future studies.
Copyright 2011 by the American Association for Laboratory Animal Science

PMCID: PMC3148635
PMID: 21838980 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mechanism of inhibition by gossypol of glycolysis and motility of monkey spermatozoa in vitro 1. J Reprod Fertil. 1983 Nov;69(2):447-52. doi: 10.1530/jrf.0.0690447.

Mechanism of inhibition by gossypol of glycolysis and motility of monkey 
spermatozoa in vitro.

Stephens DT
 Critchlow LM, Hoskins DD.
Low levels of gossypol inhibited motility and anaerobic glycolysis of ejaculated 
rhesus monkey spermatozoa.
Inhibition (50%) of both occurred at a gossypol: 
sperm ratio of 8 nmol/10(8) spermatozoa, and complete inhibition of both 
occurred at a ratio of 75 nmol/10(8) spermatozoa.
Determination and comparison 
of the levels of glycolytic intermediates in intact spermatozoa, incubated with 
and without gossypol, indicated that the only site of glycolytic inhibition was 
lactate dehydrogenase-X (EC 1 X 1 X 1 X 27).
At gossypol: sperm ratios above 6 
nmol/10(8) spermatozoa, gossypol also decreased the concentrations of the 
adenine nucleotides, ATP, ADP and AMP, and this is most probably the basis for 
its toxic effect on spermatozoa.
DOI: 10.1530/jrf.0.0690447
PMID: 6631812 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Counteractive effects of cannabinoid and nicotine-addictive behavior 1. Neuroreport. 2011 Mar 9;22(4):181-4. doi: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e328343f5cb.

Counteractive effects of cannabinoid and nicotine-addictive behavior.

Han J(1)
 Liu Z, Ren W, Zhang X.
Author information:
(1)School of Life Sciences, Shaanxi Normal University, Xian, Shaanxi Province, 
PR China.
Our recent results suggest that cannabinoid exposure induces conditioned place 
preference (CPP) through facilitated induction of synaptic long-term depression 
at dopamine circuitry of the midbrain ventral tegmental area (VTA).
Here, we 
show that chronic nicotine exposure also induces CPP, but facilitates the 
induction of synaptic long-term potentiation in the VTA.
Coadministration of 
cannabinoid and nicotine leads to a blockade of facilitated long-term depression 
and long-term potentiation induction in these neurons and elimination of CPP.
These findings point to counteractive effects of cannabinoid and 
nicotine-addictive behavior through opposite changes in synaptic plasticity of 
dopamine circuitry of the VTA.
DOI: 10.1097/WNR.0b013e328343f5cb
PMID: 21304327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Impairing Effect of Acute Ethanol on Spreading Depression is Antagonized by Astaxanthin in Rats of 2 Young‐Adult Ages <jats:sec><jats:title>Background</jats:title><jats:p>Ethanol (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content>) abuse and insufficient ingestion of antioxidants are external factors that can alter brain electrophysiology. Our previous studies have demonstrated that the excitability‐related brain electrophysiological phenomenon known as cortical spreading depression (<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CSD</jats:styled-content>) was facilitated by chronic <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content> intake
 and chronic treatment with carotenoids attenuated this effect.
Here, we investigated the acute effect of a single <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content> administration on <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CSD</jats:styled-content> in young and adult rats previously (1 hour) treated with 10 μg/kg of astaxanthin.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Methods</jats:title><jats:p>Male <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">W</jats:styled-content>istar rats (5 young‐ and 5 adult groups, 60 to 80 and 150 to 180 days of age, respectively) were treated by 2 gavage procedures at 1‐hour interval as follows: groups 1 and 2 received astaxanthin in gavage I combined with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content> (group 1) or water (group 2) in gavage <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">II</jats:styled-content>; groups 3 and 4 received olive oil (the vehicle in which astaxanthin was dissolved) in gavage I combined with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content> (group 3) or water (group 4) in gavage <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">II</jats:styled-content>; group 5 received water in gavage I combined with <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content> in gavage <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">II</jats:styled-content>.
<jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CSD</jats:styled-content> was recorded on the cortical surface for 4 hours.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p>Compared to the respective water and oil controls (groups 2 and 4; <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CSD</jats:styled-content> velocities: 3.73 ± 0.09 and 3.78 ± 0.07 mm/min in the young groups; 2.99 ± 0.10 and 3.05 ± 0.19 mm/min in the adult groups), a single dose of <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content> (groups 3 and 5) decreased <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CSD</jats:styled-content> propagation velocities (3.29 ± 0.23 and 3.16 ± 0.10 mm/min in the young groups; 2.71 ± 0.27 and 2.75 ± 0.31 mm/min in the adult groups).
Astaxanthin antagonized the impairing effect of acute <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content> on <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CSD</jats:styled-content> (group 1; mean velocity: 3.70 ± 0.19 and 3.13 ± 0.16 mm/min for the young and adult groups, respectively).</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title><jats:p>The results showed an antagonistic effect of acute <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content> treatment on <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case">CSD</jats:styled-content> propagation that was reverted by astaxanthin.
The <jats:styled-content style="fixed-case"><jats:roman>EtOH</jats:roman></jats:styled-content>–astaxanthin interaction was not influenced by the age, as it was found in both young and adult animals.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Target‐cell‐specific bidirectional synaptic plasticity at hippocampal output synapses <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>It is commonly accepted that the hippocampus is critically involved in the explicit memory formation of mammals. The subiculum is the principal target of CA1 pyramidal cells and thus serves as the major relay station for the outgoing hippocampal information. Pyramidal cells in the subiculum can be classified according to their firing properties into burst‐spiking and regular‐spiking cells. In the present study we demonstrate that burst‐spiking and regular‐spiking cells show fundamentally different forms of low frequency‐induced synaptic plasticity in rats. In burst‐spiking cells
 low‐frequency stimulation (at 0.5–5 Hz) induces frequency‐dependent long‐term depression (LTD) with a maximum at 1 Hz.
This LTD is dependent on the activation of NMDAR and masks an mGluR‐dependent long‐term potentiation (LTP).
In contrast, in regular‐spiking cells low‐frequency stimulation induces an mGluR‐dependent LTP that masks an NMDAR‐dependent LTD.
Both processes depend on postsynaptic Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>‐signaling as BAPTA prevents the induction of synaptic plasticity in both cell types.
Thus, mGluR‐dependent LTP and NMDAR‐dependent LTD occur simultaneously at CA1‐subiculum synapses and the predominant direction of synaptic plasticity relies on the cell type investigated.
Our data indicate a novel mechanism for the sliding‐threshold model of synaptic plasticity, in which induction of LTP and LTD seems to be driven by the relative activation state of NMDAR and mGluR.
Our observation that the direction of synaptic plasticity correlates with the discharge properties of the postsynaptic cell reveals a novel and intriguing mechanism of target specificity that may serve in tuning the significance of neuronal information by trafficking hippocampal output onto either subicular burst‐spiking or regular‐spiking cells.</jats:p>
Effects of halothane and isoflurane in the upper airway of dogs during development 1. Respir Physiol. 1993 Mar;91(2-3):237-46. doi: 10.1016/0034-5687(93)90102-g.

Effects of halothane and isoflurane in the upper airway of dogs during 
development.

Sant'Ambrogio FB(1)
 Anderson JW, Nishino T, Sant'Ambrogio G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Texas Medical Branch, 
Galveston 77555-0641.
It has been previously found that volatile anesthetics significantly affect the 
activity of laryngeal receptors.
In this study we have investigated the 
respiratory effects of these volatile anesthetics delivered into the upper 
airway of newborn and adult dogs.
Experiments were performed on 17 5-14-day-old, 
3 26-28-day-old and 3 adult dogs, anesthetized and breathing spontaneously 
through a tracheostomy.
In the youngest age group, halothane decreased 
ventilation (VE) to 37.6 +/- 6.8% of control (mean +/- SE; P < 0.01) due to a 
decrease in both frequency and tidal volume.
Peak inspiratory and expiratory 
flows, and esophageal pressure (Pes) were depressed also (60.8 +/- 6.5%, 51.6 
+/- 7.1% and 66.5 +/- 8.1% of control, respectively; P < 0.01).
Superior 
laryngeal nerve (SLN) section abolished the changes in VE, but residual 
significant decreases in peak flows and Pes were still present and disappeared 
only after topical anesthetization of the nasal cavities.
Isoflurane had similar 
but weaker effects on VE (74.2 +/- 2.8% of control; P < 0.01), accompanied by a 
decrease in peak inspiratory and expiratory flows and Pes.
SLN section abolished 
these changes.
In the 26-28 day age group there was only a decrease in peak 
inspiratory airflow with the halothane challenge; isoflurane did not have any 
effect.
In the adult dogs halothane caused only a marginal decrease in 
inspiratory time.
The depressive effects of halothane and isoflurane should be 
considered when they are used for induction of anesthesia in newborns.
DOI: 10.1016/0034-5687(93)90102-g
PMID: 8469847 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of gestational allopregnanolone administration in rats bred for high affective behavior 1. Physiol Behav. 2010 Feb 9;99(2):212-7. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.05.014.
Epub  2009 May 31.

Effects of gestational allopregnanolone administration in rats bred for high 
affective behavior.

Zimmerberg B(1)
 Martinez AR, Skudder CM, Killien EY, Robinson SA, Brunelli SA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Williams College, Williamstown, MA 01267, USA.
Betty.Zimmerberg@williams.edu

The anxiolytic neurosteroid allopregnanolone 
(3alpha-hydroxy-5alpha-pregnan-20-one or 3alpha,5alpha-THP) has been proposed to 
play a developmental role in emergent neural regulation of affective behavior.
This experiment examined whether allopregnanolone administered during the last 
week of gestation in rats would alter neonatal and adult offspring behaviors in 
the selectively-bred High vocalizing line, who have low levels of 
allopregnanolone and high levels of anxious/depressive behaviors.
Dams were 
injected twice a day with the neurosteroid or vehicle, or handled as controls, 
and were tested on the elevated plus maze just before parturition.
Maternal 
behavior was assessed throughout the first week of life, and affective behavior 
in the offspring was tested at one week of age (ultrasonic vocalizations test) 
and as adults (plus maze and forced swim tests).
Offspring prenatally exposed to 
allopregnanolone were less anxious as neonates and less depressed as adults 
compared to both control groups.
Only male adult offspring, however, revealed 
less anxious behavior on the plus maze.
Neither the dams' anxiety behavior 
measured in late gestation nor their postnatal maternal behavior was altered 
compared to controls, suggesting a direct, long-lasting effect of gestational 
allopregnanolone on the developing fetal brain independent of mediating maternal 
factors.
These results are discussed in light of new evidence about the 
developmental role of the GABA-A receptor prenatally.
2009 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.05.014
PMID: 19490923 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of a combination of B complex vitamins and ascorbic acid on liver lipid content in rats intoxicated with ethyl alcohol. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1969 Oct;19(10):1742-3.

Effect of a combination of B complex vitamins and ascorbic acid on liver lipid 
content in rats intoxicated with ethyl alcohol.

Moretti A
 Ciceri C, Suchowsky GK.
PMID: 5395376 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fluoxetine and all other SSRIs are 5-HT&lt;sub&gt;2B&lt;/sub&gt; Agonists - Importance for their Therapeutic Effects 1. Curr Neuropharmacol. 2014 Jul;12(4):365-79. doi: 
10.2174/1570159X12666140828221720.

Fluoxetine and all other SSRIs are 5-HT2B Agonists - Importance for their 
Therapeutic Effects.

Peng L(1)
 Gu L(1), Li B(1), Hertz L(1).
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Metabolic Brain Diseases, Institute of Metabolic Disease 
Research and Drug Development, China Medical University, Shenyang, P. R. China.
Fluoxetine and other serotonin-specific re-uptake inhibitors (SSRIs) are 
generally thought to owe their therapeutic potency to inhibition of the 
serotonin transporter (SERT).
However, research in our laboratory showed that it 
affects, with relatively high affinity the 5-HT2B receptor in cultured 
astrocytes; this finding was confirmed by independent observations showing that 
fluoxetine loses its ability to elicit SSRI-like responses in behavioral assays 
in mice in which the 5-HT2B receptor was knocked-out genetically or inhibited 
pharmacologically.
All clinically used SSRIs are approximately equipotent 
towards 5-HT2B receptors and exert their effect on cultured astrocytes at 
concentrations similar to those used clinically, a substantial difference from 
their effect on SERT.
We have demonstrated up-regulation and editing of 
astrocytic genes for ADAR2, the kainate receptor GluK2, cPLA2 and the 5-HT2B 
receptor itself after chronic treatment of cultures, which do not express SERT 
and after treatment of mice (expressing SERT) for 2 weeks with fluoxetine, 
followed by isolation of astrocytic and neuronal cell fractionation.
Affected 
genes were identical in both experimental paradigms.
Fluoxetine treatment also 
altered Ca(2+) homeostatic cascades, in a specific way that differs from that 
seen after treatment with the anti-bipolar drugs carbamazepine, 
lithium, or valproic acid.
All changes occurred after a lag period similar to 
what is seen for fluoxetine's clinical effects, and some of the genes were 
altered in the opposite direction by mild chronic inescapable stress, known to 
cause anhedonia, a component of major depression.
In the anhedonic mice these 
changes were reversed by treatment with SSRIs.
DOI: 10.2174/1570159X12666140828221720
PMCID: PMC4207076
PMID: 25342944
Effect of pentoxifylline on α- and β-adrenoceptor sites in cerebral cortex
 medial basal hypothalamus and pineal gland of the rat 1.
Neuropharmacology.
1982 Mar;21(3):243-8. doi: 10.1016/0028-3908(82)90194-0.
Effect of pentoxifylline on alpha- and beta-adrenoceptor sites in cerebral 
cortex medial basal hypothalamus and pineal gland of the rat.
Lowenstein PR, Vacas MI, Cardinali DP.
The intraperitoneal injection of the methylxanthine derivative pentoxifylline 
(3,7-dimethyl-1-(5-oxo-hexyl)-xanthine] brought about, 3 hr later, a significant 
depression of alpha- and beta-adrenoceptor sites in the cerebral cortex, and of 
beta-adrenoceptor sites in medial basal hypothalamus and pineal gland, (assessed 
from the specific binding of radioactive dihydroergocryptine and 
dihydroalprenolol respectively).
The changes in the density of binding sites 
were not accompanied by significant modifications of the Kd's.
Sympathetic 
denervation of the pineal gland by superior cervical ganglionectomy (SCGx) 
abolished the changes of beta-adrenoceptor number in the pineal caused by 
pentoxifylline.
The increase of alpha-adrenoceptor sites in the hypothalamus 
brought about by ganglionectomy was not affected by injection of pentoxifylline.
Pentoxifylline did not compete in vitro for radioligand binding to brain 
membranes.
These results suggest that methylxanthines depress brain adrenoceptor 
sites acutely, probably by down-regulation of receptors following the increase 
in catecholamine release caused by injection of the drug.
DOI: 10.1016/0028-3908(82)90194-0
PMID: 6280095 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Altered GluN2B NMDA receptor function and synaptic plasticity during early pathology in the PS2APP mouse model of Alzheimer's disease 1. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Feb;74:254-62. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.11.017. Epub 2014
Dec  4.

Altered GluN2B NMDA receptor function and synaptic plasticity during early 
pathology in the PS2APP mouse model of Alzheimer's disease.

Hanson JE(1)
 Pare JF(2), Deng L(3), Smith Y(2), Zhou Q(4).
Author information:
(1)Genentech Inc., Department of Neuroscience, 1 DNA Way, MS 230B, South San 
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
Electronic address: hanson.jesse@gene.com.
(2)Yerkes National Primate Research Center, Department of Neurology, UDALL 
Center of Excellence for Parkinson's Disease, Emory University, 954, Gatewood Rd 
NE, Atlanta, GA, USA.
(3)Genentech Inc., Department of Neuroscience, 1 DNA Way, MS 230B, South San 
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
(4)Genentech Inc., Department of Neuroscience, 1 DNA Way, MS 230B, South San 
Francisco, CA 94080, USA.
Electronic address: zhouqiang@PKUSZ.edu.cn.
GluN2B subunit containing NMDARs (GluN2B-NMDARs) mediate pathophysiological 
effects of acutely applied amyloid beta (Aβ), including impaired long-term 
potentiation (LTP).
However, in transgenic Alzheimer's disease (AD) mouse models 
which feature gradual Aβ accumulation, the function of GluN2B-NMDARs and their 
contribution to synaptic plasticity are unknown.
Therefore, we examined the role 
of GluN2B-NMDARs in synaptic function and plasticity in the hippocampus of 
PS2APP transgenic mice.
Although LTP induced by theta burst stimulation (TBS) 
was normal in PS2APP mice, it was significantly reduced by the selective 
GluN2B-NMDAR antagonist Ro25-6981 (Ro25) in PS2APP mice, but not wild type (wt) 
mice.
While NMDARs activated by single synaptic stimuli were not blocked by 
Ro25, NMDARs recruited during burst stimulation showed larger blockade by Ro25 
in PS2APP mice.
Thus, the unusual dependence of LTP on GluN2B-NMDARs in PS2APP 
mice suggests that non-synaptic GluN2B-NMDARs are activated by glutamate that 
spills out of synaptic cleft during the burst stimulation used to induce LTP.
While long-term depression (LTD) was normal in PS2APP mice, and Ro25 had no 
impact on LTD in wt mice, Ro25 impaired LTD in PS2APP mice, again demonstrating 
aberrant GluN2B-NMDAR function during plasticity.
Together these results 
demonstrate altered GluN2B-NMDAR function in a model of early AD pathology that 
has implications for the therapeutic targeting of NMDARs in AD.
Copyright © 2014.
Published by Elsevier Inc.

DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2014.11.017
PMCID: PMC4419865
PMID: 25484285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Phosphatidylserine. Monograph. 1. Altern Med Rev. 2008 Sep;13(3):245-7.

Phosphatidylserine. Monograph.

[No authors listed]

PMID: 18950250 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Hypoxia and Reoxygenation on Steady-state and Potentiated Contractions in Papillary Muscle of Guinea Pigs. 1. Jpn Heart J. 1992 Jan;33(1):73-81. doi: 10.1536/ihj.33.73.

Effects of hypoxia and reoxygenation on steady-state and potentiated 
contractions in papillary muscle of guinea pigs.

Asayama J(1)
 Tatsumi T, Miyazaki H, Yamahara Y, Matsumoto T, Sakai R, Inoue M, 
Omori I, Inoue D, Nakagawa M.

Author information:
(1)Second Department of Medicine, Kyoto Prefectural University of Medicine, 
Japan.
We studied the effects of hypoxia and reoxygenation on steady-state contractions 
and potentiated contractions of papillary muscles of guinea pigs.
Isometric 
tension was measured while 120 min periods of hypoxia and reoxygenation were 
repeated twice.
Reoxygenation after the first period of hypoxia induced a 
gradual recovery in steady-state contractions and a rapid recovery in 
potentiated contractions from the first hypoxia-induced contractile depression.
After the second period of hypoxia, steady-state and potentiated contractions 
decreased progressively.
During the second period of reoxygenation, the recovery 
of steady-state and potentiated contractions was very poor and the marked 
elevation of diastolic tension did not decrease.
There were no good correlations 
between hypoxic depression just before reoxygenation and the recovery of both 
potentiated contraction and steady-state contraction at 120 min of 
reoxygenation.
The recovery from the hypoxia-induced depression was poor in the 
preparations with marked elevation in diastolic tension.
From these findings, we 
conclude that hypoxia-induced depression is progressively worsened by an 
additional episode of hypoxia and that diastolic tension is one of the 
determinants of the low contractile level achieved by steady-state and 
potentiated contractions in the severely hypoxic state.
The degree of 
hypoxia-induced depression does not determine redevelopment of force with 
reoxygenation.
DOI: 10.1536/ihj.33.73
PMID: 1573781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hypersensitivity to lipid mobilizing agents in essential fatty acid (EFA) deficient rats 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1967 Oct;2(1):48-52. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(67)90022-2.

Hypersensitivity olipid mobilizing agents in essential fatty acid (EFA) 
deficient rats.

Bizzi A
 Veneroni E, Garattini S, Puglisi L, Paoletti R.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(67)90022-2
PMID: 4296636 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Activation of cholinergic mechanisms in the medulla oblongata reverse intravenous opioid-induced respiratory depression. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1987 Jan;240(1):352-8.

Activation of cholinergic mechanisms in the medulla oblongata reverse 
intravenous opioid-induced respiratory depression.

Willette RN
 Doorley BM, Sapru HN.
The role of cholinergic mechanisms in opioid-induced respiratory depression was 
investigated in isoflurane-anesthetized rats.
In these animals, the i.v.
administration of fentanyl, a clinically useful potent opioid 
analgesic/anesthetic, induced a prolonged period of apnea and subsequent rise in 
the end-tidal CO2, hypotension and bradycardia.
The centrally acting 
anticholinesterase, physostigmine, significantly decreased fentanyl-induced 
respiratory and circulatory depression.
The beneficial respiratory and 
circulatory effects of physostigmine could be abolished by the administration of 
muscarinic antagonists, e.g., scopolamine hydrobromide or atropine sulfate.
Inhibition of inspiratory phrenic nerve activity by fentanyl and restoration of 
this activity by the subsequent i.v.
administration of physostigmine indicates 
that the origin of this opioid-cholinergic interaction is the central nervous 
system.
Similar effects on phrenic nerve discharge were observed when the 
systemic administration of fentanyl was followed by microinjection of 
physostigmine or carbachol in the rostral ventrolateral medulla.
In conclusion, 
opioid-induced respiratory depression after systemic administration is obtunded 
greatly by facilitation of muscarinic mechanisms in the ventrolateral medulla.
Inhibition of a cholinergic link in the central chemosensor may underlie 
opioid-induced respiratory depression.
Manipulation of this cholinergic link 
could lead to the use and development of analgesics devoid of respiratory 
depression.
PMID: 3806396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Rescue of impaired late–phase long-term depression in a tau transgenic mouse model 1. Neurobiol Aging. 2015 Feb;36(2):730-9. doi: 
10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.09.015. Epub 2014 Sep 28.

Rescue of impaired late-phase long-term depression in a tau transgenic mouse 
model.

Ahmed T(1)
 Blum D(2), Burnouf S(3), Demeyer D(4), Buée-Scherrer V(2), D'Hooge 
R(1), Buée L(2), Balschun D(5).
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Biological Psychology, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
(2)Université Lille-Nord de France, UDSL, Lille, France; Inserm UMR837, 
Jean-Pierre Aubert Research Centre, Lille, France; CHRU-Lille, Lille, France.
(3)Université Lille-Nord de France, UDSL, Lille, France; Inserm UMR837, 
Jean-Pierre Aubert Research Centre, Lille, France; Max-Planck Institute for 
Biology of Ageing, Köln, Germany.
(4)Université Lille-Nord de France, UDSL, Lille, France; Inserm UMR837, 
Jean-Pierre Aubert Research Centre, Lille, France.
(5)Laboratory of Biological Psychology, University of Leuven, Leuven, Belgium.
Electronic address: Detlef.Balschun@ppw.kuleuven.be.
Cognitive decline, the hallmark of Alzheimer's disease, and accompanying 
neuropsychiatric symptoms share dysfunctions of synaptic processes as a common 
cellular pathomechanism.
Long-term potentiation has proven to be a sensitive 
tool for the "diagnosis" of such synaptic dysfunctions.
Much less, however, is 
known about how long-term depression (LTD), an alternative mechanism for the 
storage of memory, is affected by Alzheimer's disease progression.
Here, we 
demonstrate that impaired late LTD (>3 hours) in THY-Tau22 mice can be rescued 
by either inhibition of glycogen synthase kinase-3 (GSK3β) activity or by 
application of the protein-phosphatase 2A agonist selenate.
In line with these 
findings, we observed increased phosphorylation of GSK3β at Y216 and reduced 
total phosphatase activity in biochemical assays of hippocampal tissue of 
THY-Tau22 mice.
Interestingly, LTD induction and pharmacologic inhibition of 
GSK3β appeared to downregulate GSK3ß activity via a marked upregulation of 
phosphorylation at the inhibitory Ser9 residue.
Our results point to alterations 
in phosphorylation and/or dephosphorylation homeostasis as key mechanisms 
underlying the deficits in LTD and hippocampus-dependent learning found in 
THY-Tau22 mice.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neurobiolaging.2014.09.015
PMID: 25443285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Signals causing change in morphological phenotype
 growth mode, and gene expression of vascular endothelial cells <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Comparison of three different lines of bovine aortal endothelial cells provides a clear demonstration of reversible morphologic phenotype coincidental with change in expression and growth mode.
These phenotypic forms can be externally controlled so that cells may exist either in an epithelioid contact‐inhibitable state or as a fibroblastoid non‐contact‐inhibitable state.</jats:p><jats:p>Clonal cell line N (normal) shows a strong tendency to maintain the epithelioid phenotype.
Clonal cell line Sp (sprout) can readily and reversibly adopt the epithelioid or fibroblastoid phenotype.
A factor in normal serum is responsible for maintaining the cells in the epithelioid phenotype.
This factor could be a growth factor since several polypeptide growth factors are shown to drive cells from the fibroblastoid phenotype to the epithelioid phenotype within 11 hours.
This growth factor‐induced change is not mediated through induced DNA synthesis.
Clonal cell line V (variant) normally maintains the fibroblastoid phenotype but can be directed to the epithelioid phenotype provided cells are on an appropriate collagenous matrix.</jats:p><jats:p>Associated with these changes in morphological phenotype are depression of the expression of the pro α<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> chain of collagen type I which may be characteristic of the contact‐inhibited state and of an 80,000 mol wt polypeptide synthesized only by cells in the fibroblastoid phenotype.
An endothelial cell collagen ECl (mol wt 177,000) was synthesized by all cell lines regardless of phenotype whereas a suspected breakdown product EC3 (mol wt 100,000) was found only in the epithelioid phenotype.
Other differences and similarities between cell lines include expression of a 135,000 mol wt glycoprotein GP (V and N), the procollagen of collagen type III (N) of fibronectin (N, V, Sp), and of the pro α<jats:sub>1</jats:sub> chain of collagen type I (Sp, V).
The characteristic expression of each line and its response to signals controlling morphologic phenotype impinges on the question of whether there exist several distinct types of vascular endothelial cells with different functional potentials controlled by extracellular signals.</jats:p>
INBREEDING DEPRESSION: TESTS OF THE OVERDOMINANCE AND PARTIAL DOMINANCE HYPOTHESES 1. Evolution. 2002 Apr;56(4):768-75. doi: 10.1111/j.0014-3820.2002.tb01387.x.

Inbreeding depression: tests of the overdominance and partial dominance 
hypotheses.

Roff DA(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Biology
 University of California, Riverside 92521, USA.
derekr@citrus.ucr.edu

The two principal theories of the causal mechanism for inbreeding depression are 
the partial dominance hypothesis and the overdominance hypothesis.
According to 
the first hypothesis, inbreeding increases the frequency of homozygous 
combinations of deleterious recessive alleles thereby decreasing fitness, 
whereas the overdominance hypothesis posits that inbreeding increases 
homozygosity and thus reduces the frequency of the superior heterozygotes.
These 
two hypotheses make different predictions on the effect of crossing inbred 
lines: the overdominance hypothesis predicts that trait means will be restored 
to the outbred means, whereas the partial dominance hypothesis predicts that 
trait means will exceed those of the outbred population.
I tested these 
predictions using seven inbred lines of the sand cricket, Gryllus firmus.
Fourteen generations of brother-sister mating resulted in an inbreeding 
depression of 20-34% in four traits: nymphal weights at ages 14 days, 21 days, 
28 days, and early fecundity.
An incomplete diallel cross of these lines showed 
genetic variation among lines and an increase in all trait means above the 
outbred means, with three being significantly higher.
These results provide 
support for the partial dominance hypothesis and are inconsistent with the 
overdominance hypothesis.
DOI: 10.1111/j.0014-3820.2002.tb01387.x
PMID: 12038534 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
INBREEDING AND OUTBREEDING DEPRESSION IN CAENORHABDITIS NEMATODES 1. Evolution. 2007 Jun;61(6):1339-52. doi: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2007.00118.x.

Inbreeding and outbreeding depression in Caenorhabditis nematodes.

Dolgin ES(1)
 Charlesworth B, Baird SE, Cutter AD.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Evolutionary Biology, University of Edinburgh, King's Buildings, 
Edinburgh, UK.
elie.dolgin@ed.ac.uk

The nematode Caenorhabditis elegans reproduces primarily by self-fertilization 
of hermaphrodites, yet males are present at low frequencies in natural 
populations (androdioecy).
The ancestral state of C. elegans was probably 
gonochorism (separate males and females), as in its relative C. remanei.
Males 
may be maintained in C. elegans because outcrossed individuals escape inbreeding 
depression.
The level of inbreeding depression is, however, expected to be low 
in such a highly selfing species, compared with an outcrosser like C. remanei.
To investigate these issues, we measured life-history traits in the progeny of 
inbred versus outcrossed C. elegans and C. remanei individuals derived from 
recently isolated natural populations.
In addition, we maintained inbred lines 
of C. remanei through 13 generations of full-sibling mating.
Highly inbred C. 
remanei showed dramatic reductions in brood size and relative fitness compared 
to outcrossed individuals, with evidence of both direct genetic and 
maternal-effect inbreeding depression.
This decline in fitness accumulated over 
time, causing extinction of nearly 90% of inbred lines, with no evidence of 
purging of deleterious mutations from the remaining lines.
In contrast, pure 
strains of C. elegans performed better than crosses between strains, indicating 
outbreeding depression.
The results are discussed in relation to the evolution 
of androdioecy and the effect of mating system on the level of inbreeding 
depression.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1558-5646.2007.00118.x
PMID: 17542844 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Toxicity Studies of 1
3-Dichlorobenzene in Sprague-Dawley Rats 1.
Drug Chem Toxicol.
1995 May-Aug;18(2-3):201-21. doi:
10.3109/01480549509014321.
Toxicity studies of 1,3-dichlorobenzene in Sprague-Dawley rats.
McCauley PT(1), Robinson M, Daniel FB, Olson GR.
Author information:
(1)Risk Reduction Engineering Laboratory U.S. EPA, Cincinnati, Ohio 45268, USA.
Male and female Sprague-Dawley rats received 1,3-dichlorobenzene daily by corn 
oil gavage for 10 or 90 consecutive days.
The 10-day study doses were 0, 37, 
147, 368 and 735 mg/kg; the 90-day study doses were 0, 9, 37, 147 and 588 mg/kg.
In the 10-day study, there was a significant depression of body weight in both 
sexes at 735 mg/kg.
Liver weights were significantly increased in both sexes at 
368 and 735 mg/kg.
Serum cholesterol levels were significantly elevated in both 
sexes at 368 and 735 mg/kg.
Histopathological evaluation revealed centrolobular 
hepatocellular degeneration at 368 mg/kg in males and 735 mg/kg in females.
In 
the 90-day study, body weights were significantly depressed in both sexes at 588 
mg/kg.
Normalization of food and water consumption by final body weight 
indicated that at 588 mg/kg both sexes had increased food and water consumption 
relative to controls.
Absolute and relative liver weights were significantly 
increased in both sexes at 147 and 588 mg/kg.
Relative kidney weights were 
significantly higher in both sexes at 588 mg/kg and in males at 147 mg/kg.
Serum 
cholesterol and calcium levels were significantly elevated over controls in 
females at 37, 147, and 588 mg/kg, and in males at all dose levels.
Histopathological evaluation at 147 and/or 588 mg/kg demonstrated liver and 
thyroid lesions in both sexes, and pituitary and kidney lesions in males.
A 
NOAEL was not firmly established.
DOI: 10.3109/01480549509014321
PMID: 7497912 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic DMI reduces thresholds for brain stimulation reward in the rat 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1991 May;39(1):1-4. doi:
10.1016/0091-3057(91)90388-i.

Chronic DMI reduces thresholds for brain stimulation reward in the rat.

Valentino DA(1)
 Riccitelli AJ, Dufresne RL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Rhode Island, Kingston 02881-0808.
The authors sought a demonstration of the validity of brain stimulation reward 
(BSR) models of depression.
It was predicted that chronic, but not acute 
antidepressant treatment would enhance BSR responding.
Rats with medial 
forebrain bundle electrodes were separated into 4 groups that received either 
saline or desmethylimipramine at 5, 10, or 20 mg/kg daily.
A rate-free, 
threshold measure that has not previously been employed in studies of BSR and 
antidepressants was used.
BSR thresholds were monitored every 3rd day over a 
9-day baseline period and an 18-day drug treatment period, and after 12 days of 
drug withdrawal.
Groups did not differ from one another till the 15th and 18th 
day of drug treatment.
The greatest effects were seen in the 10 and 20 mg 
groups.
The 20 mg group returned to baseline after drug withdrawal, but the 10 
mg group did not.
The absolute size of the effect was considered to be small, 
leading the authors to speculate that antidepressants act on homeostatic 
mechanisms that stabilize BSR substrates, only indirectly enhancing transmission 
of the reward signal.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(91)90388-i
PMID: 1924490 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Renomedullary and intestinal hyaluronan content during body water excess: a study in rats and gerbils <jats:p>Our previous studies in rats have suggested a role for renomedullary hyaluronan (HA) in water homeostasis. The gerbil is known for its unique ability to conserve water. In the present study renal papillary and intestinal HA were compared between groups of anaesthetized gerbils and rats before and after up to 6 h of <jats:sc>i.v.</jats:sc> water loading. Baseline papillary HA in gerbils was only 37 % of that in the rat. Water loading in rats increased the papillary HA content. Elevation was maximal (+27 %
 <jats:styled-content><jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.05</jats:styled-content>) after 2 h of water loading and then declined to control levels after 6 h of water loading (+3 %, n.s.).
In contrast, the gerbil responded with a decreased papillary HA content during water loading.
The depression was maximal after 2 h (‐49 %, <jats:styled-content><jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.05</jats:styled-content>) and was still 41 % below the control values after 6 h (<jats:styled-content><jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.05</jats:styled-content>).
The urine flow rate increased rapidly in the rat and its maximum, 21 times above the control level (<jats:styled-content><jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.05</jats:styled-content>), occurred at the HA peak, i.e.
after 2 h of water loading while in the gerbil, the urine flow rate increased slowly and slightly and was only six times above control values after 6 h of water loading (<jats:styled-content><jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.05</jats:styled-content>).
The HA content along the intestine was similar in the two species: lowest in the duodenum and jejunum and highest in the distal colon.
To conclude, in the rat, the elevation of papillary interstitial HA during acute water loading would counteract water reabsorption by changing the physico‐chemical characteristics of the interstitial matrix favouring rapid water diuresis.
This would work as a complement to the powerful regulation by ADH.
The gerbil has a diametrically different regulation of papillary HA turnover during water loading.
The decreased papillary HA level during water loading and the slow and small diuretic response may represent a genetic difference in adaptation to enhance the ability to conserve water in an arid environment.</jats:p>
Cortical Gamma Rhythms Modulate NMDAR-Mediated Spike Timing Dependent Plasticity in a Biophysical Model 1. PLoS Comput Biol. 2009 Dec;5(12):e1000602. doi: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000602. 
Epub 2009 Dec 11.

Cortical gamma rhythms modulate NMDAR-mediated spike timing dependent plasticity 
in a biophysical model.

Lee S(1)
 Sen K, Kopell N.

Author information:
(1)Program in Neuroscience, Boston University, Boston, Massachusetts, United 
States of America.
shane@math.bu.edu

Spike timing dependent plasticity (STDP) has been observed experimentally in 
vitro and is a widely studied neural algorithm for synaptic modification.
While 
the functional role of STDP has been investigated extensively, the effect of 
rhythms on the precise timing of STDP has not been characterized as well.
We use 
a simplified biophysical model of a cortical network that generates pyramidal 
interneuronal gamma rhythms (PING).
Plasticity via STDP is investigated at the 
excitatory pyramidal cell synapse from a gamma frequency (30-90 Hz) input 
independent of the network gamma rhythm.
The input may represent a 
corticocortical or an information-specific thalamocortical connection.
This 
synapse is mediated by N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor mediated (NMDAR) currents.
For distinct network and input frequencies, the model shows robust frequency 
regimes of potentiation and depression, providing a mechanism by which responses 
to certain inputs can potentiate while responses to other inputs depress.
For 
potentiating regimes, the model suggests an optimal amount and duration of 
plasticity that can occur, which depends on the time course for the decay of the 
postsynaptic NMDAR current.
Prolonging the duration of the input beyond this 
optimal time results in depression.
Inserting pauses in the input can increase 
the total potentiation.
The optimal pause length corresponds to the decay time 
of the NMDAR current.
Thus, STDP in this model provides a mechanism for 
potentiation and depression depending on input frequency and suggests that the 
slow NMDAR current decay helps to regulate the optimal amplitude and duration of 
the plasticity.
The optimal pause length is comparable to the time scale of the 
negative phase of a modulatory theta rhythm, which may pause gamma rhythm 
spiking.
Our pause results may suggest a novel role for this theta rhythm in 
plasticity.
Finally, we discuss our results in the context of auditory 
thalamocortical plasticity.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pcbi.1000602
PMCID: PMC2782132
PMID: 20011119 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors have declared that no competing 
interests exist.
Evidence for an Association between Post-Fledging Dispersal and Microsatellite Multilocus Heterozygosity in a Large Population of Greater Flamingos 1. PLoS One. 2013 Nov 22;8(11):e81118. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081118. 
eCollection 2013.

Evidence for an association between post-fledging dispersal and microsatellite 
multilocus heterozygosity in a large population of greater flamingos.

Gillingham MA(1)
 Cézilly F, Wattier R, Béchet A.
Author information:
(1)Université de Bourgogne, Equipe Ecologie Evolutive, UMR CNRS 6282 
Biogéosciences, Dijon, France ; Centre de Recherche de la Tour du Valat, Le 
Sambuc, Arles, France ; Leibniz Institute for Zoo and Wildlife Research, dpt.
of 
Evolutionary Genetics, Berlin, Germany.
Dispersal can be divided into three stages: departure, transience and 
settlement.
Despite the fact that theoretical studies have emphasized the 
importance of heterozygosity on dispersal strategies, empirical evidence of its 
effect on different stages of dispersal is lacking.
Here, using multi-event 
capture-mark-recapture models, we show a negative association between 
microsatellite multilocus heterozygosity (MLH; 10 loci; n = 1023) and 
post-fledging dispersal propensity for greater flamingos, Phoenicopterus roseus, 
born in southern France.
We propose that the negative effects of inbreeding 
depression affects competitive ability and therefore more homozygous individuals 
are more likely to disperse because they are less able to compete within the 
highly saturated natal site.
Finally, a model with the effect of MLH on 
propensity of post-fledgling dispersers to disperse to the long-distance sites 
of Africa was equivalent to the null model, suggesting that MLH had low to no 
effect on dispersal distance.
Variations in individual genetic quality thus 
result in context-dependent heterogeneity in dispersal strategies at each stage 
of dispersal.
Our results have important implications on fitness since sites 
visited early in life are known to influence site selection later on in life and 
future survival.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0081118
PMCID: PMC3838344
PMID: 24278385 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Elevated diaphragm electromyogram during neonatal hypoxic ventilatory depression <jats:p> Diaphragmatic electromyogram (EMG) was obtained in eight 48-h-old unanesthetized monkeys while breathing air and then either of two different hypoxic gas mixtures (12 or 8% O2 in N2) for 5 min. Minute ventilation (VI) rose significantly above control levels by 1 min of hypoxemia while animals were breathing either of the hypoxic gas mixtures as tidal volume (VT) and slope and rate moving average EMG increased. The relative gains in VI were associated with comparable increases in diaphragmatic neural activity per minute (EMG/min = peak EMG X frequency) during this early phase of hypoxemia. VI subsequently fell to control levels (inspired O2 fraction = 12%
 arterial PO2 = 23 +/- 3 Torr) or significantly below (inspired O2 fraction = 8%, arterial PO2 = 18 +/- 0.4 Torr) by 5 min of hypoxemia, secondary to changes in VT.
Despite the decline in VI, slope and rate moving average EMG, and EMG/min remained statistically above control values by 5 min of hypoxemia, although there was a trend for EMG/min to decrease slightly from the 1-min peak response.
These findings demonstrate that hypoxic-induced depression of neural input to the diaphragm is not independently responsible for the biphasic nature of the newborn ventilatory response, although it cannot be ruled out as a contributor.
The fall in inspiratory volumes despite constant elevated EMG activity suggests the presence of a change in respiratory mechanics and/or an impairment in diaphragmatic contractile function without offsetting neural compensatory activity.
</jats:p>
[Inhibition of DNA synthesis and cell multiplication by apurinic acid and apyrimidinic acid]. 1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmakol. 1970;266(2):161-78.

[Inhibition of DNA synthesis and cell multiplication by apurinic acid and 
apyrimidinic acid].

[Article in German]

Heicke B.

PMID: 4245725 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Volume‐regulated anion channels do not contribute extracellular adenosine during the hypoxic depression of excitatory synaptic transmission in area CA1 of rat hippocampus <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>We investigated whether volume‐regulated anion channels (VRACs) contributed to the accumulation of extracellular adenosine during hypoxia in area CA1. The rapid hypoxic depression of the fEPSP was greatly attenuated by the selective adenosine A<jats:sub>1</jats:sub> receptor antagonist DPCPX (50 n<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>)
 but not affected by the VRAC blockers tamoxifen (10–30 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>) or DNDS (1 m<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>).
Our data argue against the efflux of adenosine per se or its precursor ATP through VRACs as making a significant contribution to extracellular adenosine during the early stages of hypoxia.</jats:p>
Chronic lithium treatment increases the phosphorylation of a 64-kDa protein in rat brains 1. Brain Res. 1987 Mar 31;407(2):312-6. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(87)91109-7.

Chronic lithium treatment increases the phosphorylation of a 64-kDa protein in 
rat brains.

Klein E
 Patel J, McDevitt R, Zohar J.
Despite the wide clinical use of lithium in the treatment of manic depressive 
illness there is no adequate explanation for its mechanism of action.
In the 
light of lithium's suggestive effects on the second messenger system in the 
brain, we studied the effects of chronic dietary lithium treatment (achieving 
blood levels in the therapeutic range) on protein phosphorylation in different 
areas of rat brain.
An increase in the phosphorylation of a 64-kDa 
membrane-associated protein was evident in the lithium-treated rats compared to 
controls.
This increase was observed only under basal phosphorylating conditions 
and was abolished when the phosphorylation was performed in the presence of Ca2+ 
or Ca2+ and calmodulin.
The possibility that this 64-kDa protein affected by 
lithium is the beta-subunit of the calmodulin-dependent protein kinase or a 
different protein which co-migrates with it is discussed.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(87)91109-7
PMID: 3032364 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Influence of unilateral cortical spreading depression on intraspecies aggression and sociability of isolated mice 1. Neurosci Behav Physiol. 1988 Sep-Oct;18(5):432-8. doi: 10.1007/BF01193891.

Influence of unilateral cortical spreading depression on intraspecies aggression 
and sociability of isolated mice.

Mikheev VV(1)
 Bianki VL, Poshivalov VP.
Author information:
(1)I. P. Pavlov First Medical Institute, Leningrad.
DOI: 10.1007/BF01193891
PMID: 3216996 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of timolol on autonomic neural discharge associated with ouabain-induced arrhythmia 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1980 Jun 13;64(2-3):95-106. doi:
10.1016/0014-2999(80)90032-1.

Effect of timolol on autonomic neural discharge associated with ouabain-induced 
arrhythmia.

Lathers CM.

The purpose of this study was to determine the effect of the beta-blocking agent 
timolol on postganglionic cardiac and preganglionic splanchnic sympathetic and 
vagal neural discharge
 ouabain-induced arrhythmia, heart rate and mean arterial 
blood pressure.
Cats were anesthetized with alpha-chloralose, given atropine, 
and pretreated with timolol (5 mg/kg, i.v.
infused at a rate of 0.5 mg/kg/min 
for 10 min).
Bolus injections of ouabain (25 microgram/kg, i.v.)
were given 
every 15 min until the animals died; the first injection was given 15 min after 
the end of the timolol infusion.
When compared with cats (n = 13) receiving only 
ouabain, timolol (n = 11 cats) increased the time to ouabain-induced arrhythmia 
and death from 23 +/- 3 to 48 +/- 7 and 46 +/- 3 to 76 +/- 9 min, respectively 
(p less than 0.05).
Both heat rate and mean arterial blood pressure had 
decreased from 137 +/- 4 to 104 +/- 6 beats/min and 133 +/- 6 to 103 +/- 7 mm 
Hg, respectively (P less than 0.05); ouabain did not reverse the decreases.
Neural activity monitored from the vagus and from the postganglionic cardiac and 
preganglionic splanchnic sympathetic nerves was not significantly altered by the 
infusion of timolol.
The administration of ouabain after timolol did not alter 
splanchnic nor vagal discharge.
Most important was the observation that 
postganglionic cardiac sympathetic neural discharge exhibited both increases and 
decreases, i.e., a nonuniform neural discharge, at the time of ouabain-induced 
arrhythmia and that the ouabain-induced nonuniformity did not occur in the cats 
pretreated with timolol.
Thus, the protective effect of timolol may be due, in 
part, to prevention of the nonuniform postganglionic cardiac sympathetic neural 
discharge and to the prevention of ouabain-induced increases in vagal discharge.
The establishment of beta-blockade and a direct negative inotropic action may 
also have contributed to the antiarrhythmic action of timolol.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(80)90032-1
PMID: 7398767 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Parameters influencing the effect of Δ9-THC on activity wheel behavior 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1974 May;2(3):435-8. doi:
10.1016/0091-3057(74)90094-x.

Parameters influencing the effect of delta9-THC on activity wheel behavior.

Fried PA.

DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(74)90094-x
PMID: 4837913 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Coronary Artery Reperfusion 1. J Clin Invest. 1972 Oct;51(10):2710-6. doi: 10.1172/JCI107090.

Coronary artery reperfusion. I. Early effects on local myocardial function and 
the extent of myocardial necrosis.

Maroko PR
 Libby P, Ginks WR, Bloor CM, Shell WE, Sobel BE, Ross J Jr.
The effects of coronary artery reperfusion 3 hr after coronary occlusion on 
contractile function and the development of myocardial damage at 24 hr was 
studied experimentally.
In 14 control and 6 reperfused dogs, relationships 
between epicardial ST segment elevation 15 min after coronary occlusion and 
myocardial creatine phosphokinase activity (CPK) and histologic appearance 24 hr 
later were examined.
The electrocardiograms were recorded from 10 to 15 sites on 
the left ventricular epicardium and transmural samples for CPK and histology 
were obtained from the same sites where epicardial electrocardiograms had been 
recorded.
An inverse relation existed between ST segment elevation (mv) 15 min 
after occlusion and log CPK activity (IU/ mg of protein) 24 hr later, log CPK = 
- 0.06ST + 1.26.
In dogs subjected to coronary artery reperfusion, there was 
significantly less CPK depression (log CPK = - 0.01ST + 1.31, [P < 0.01]) than 
that expected from the control group.
In the control group 97% of specimens 
showing ST segment elevations over 2 mv at 15 min showed abnormal histology 24 
hr later.
In contrast, in the reperfused group 43% of sites exhibiting elevated 
ST segment at 15 min showed abnormal histology 24 hr later.
In six additional 
dogs it was shown that the paradoxical movement of the left ventricular wall 
could be reversed within 1 hr of perfusion.
Therefore, by enzymatic and 
histologic criteria, as well as by functional assessment, coronary artery 
reperfusion 3 hr after occlusion resulted in salvage of myocardial tissue.
DOI: 10.1172/JCI107090
PMCID: PMC332971
PMID: 5056663 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Resident intruder paradigm-induced aggression relieves depressive-like behaviors in male rats subjected to chronic mild stress 1. Med Sci Monit. 2014 Jun 9;20:945-52. doi: 10.12659/MSM.890200.

Resident intruder paradigm-induced aggression relieves depressive-like behaviors 
in male rats subjected to chronic mild stress.

Wei S(1)
 Ji XW(2), Wu CL(3), Li ZF(4), Sun P(1), Wang JQ(1), Zhao QT(1), Gao 
J(1), Guo YH(1), Sun SG(4), Qiao MQ(1).
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Traditional Chinese Medicine Classical Theory, Ministry of 
Education, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China 
(mainland).
(2)Second Affiliated Hospita, Shandong University of Traditional Chinese 
Medicine/Shandong Provincial Hospital of Integrated Medicine, Jinan, China 
(mainland).
(3)Jinan Central Hospital, Jinan, China (mainland).
(4)Laboratory of Behavioral Brain Analysis, Shandong University of Traditional 
Chinese Medicine, Jinan, China (mainland).
BACKGROUND: Accumulating epidemiological evidence shows that life event 
stressors are major vulnerability factors for psychiatric diseases such as major 
depression.
It is also well known that the resident intruder paradigm (RIP) 
results in aggressive behavior in male rats.
However, it is not known how 
resident intruder paradigm-induced aggression affects depressive-like behavior 
in isolated male rats subjected to chronic mild stress (CMS), which is an animal 
model of depression.
MATERIAL AND METHODS: Male Wistar rats were divided into 3 groups: non-stressed 
controls, isolated rats subjected to the CMS protocol, and resident intruder 
paradigm-exposed rats subjected to the CMS protocol.
RESULTS: In the sucrose intake test, ingestion of a 1% sucrose solution by rats 
in the CMS group was significantly lower than in control and CMS+RIP rats after 
3 weeks of stress.
In the open-field test, CMS rats had significantly lower 
open-field scores compared to control rats.
Furthermore, the total scores given 
the CMS group were significantly lower than in the CMS+RIP rats.
In the forced 
swimming test (FST), the immobility times of CMS rats were significantly longer 
than those of the control or CMS+RIP rats.
However, no differences were observed 
between controls and CMS+RIP rats.
CONCLUSIONS: Our data show that aggressive behavior evoked by the resident 
intruder paradigm could relieve broad-spectrum depressive-like behaviors in 
isolated adult male rats subjected to CMS.
DOI: 10.12659/MSM.890200
PMCID: PMC4067422
PMID: 24911067 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antioxidant Enzyme Activities and Malondialdehyde Levels in Patients with Obsessive-Compulsive Disorder <jats:p>To examine the importance of free radicals in the pathogenesis of obsessive-compulsive disorder (OCD)
 we aimed to evaluate whether malondialdehyde (MDA), a product of lipid peroxidation, and antioxidant enzyme [superoxide dismutase (SOD), glutathione peroxidase (GSH-Px) and catalase (CAT)] activity levels were associated with OCD.
The patients were divided into two subgroups according to whether DSM-IV major depressive disorder (MDD) was accompanied (OCD + MDD) or not (OCD – MDD).
The MDA and antioxidant enzyme levels both in patients and controls were determined.
SOD activity levels were significantly higher in the OCD + MDD group compared with the control and the OCD – MDD group.
Although the OCD – MDD group had slightly higher SOD activity levels as compared with the controls, the difference was not statistically significant.
GSH-Px activity levels were statistically significantly higher in both groups compared with controls.
Likewise, there was a significant difference in GSH-Px activity levels between the OCD + MDD and OCD – MDD group.
CAT activity levels were slightly higher in the OCD + MDD group compared with the OCD – MDD and control group.
MDA levels in both groups were significantly higher than in controls.
In addition, the difference in MDA levels between both groups was statistically significant.
In conclusion, our results suggest that OCD is associated with free radicals and that it may be a heterogeneous subtype including some biological indications of anxiety and affective disorders.
More comprehensive and detailed studies are needed to decipher the exact role of free radicals in OCD.</jats:p>
[The reciprocal relationships between the epiphysis and the suprachiasmatic nuclei of the hypothalamus during the restructuring of the circadian mobility in rats under an altered light regimen]. 1. Zh Vyssh Nerv Deiat Im I P Pavlova. 1993 Jan-Feb;43(1):69-75.

[The reciprocal relationships between the epiphysis and the suprachiasmatic 
nuclei of the hypothalamus during the restructuring of the circadian mobility in 
rats under an altered light regimen].

[Article in Russian]

Arushanian EB
 Baturin VA, Popov AV.
Pinealectomy and reserpine advanced the reorganization of the circadian rhythm 
of motor activity of rats following a ten-hour shift in the photoperiod.
Bilateral electrolytic lesion of the hypothalamic suprachiasmatic nuclei and 
administration of the antidepressant drug, imipramine, on the contrary, delayed 
the rhythm change.
The results suggest a possible antagonistic reciprocal 
relationship between the pineal gland and the main pacemaker, whose balance 
causes a gradual adaptation of animals to the changing environment.
Fast 
reorganization of motor activity at pineal dysfunction or under the influence of 
depressogenic drugs could cause desynchronization and psychiatric disorders in a 
form of depression.
PMID: 8385401 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Respiratory and locomotor stimulation by low doses of dermorphin
 a mu1 receptor-mediated effect.
1.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther.
1990 Jan;252(1):235-40.
Respiratory and locomotor stimulation by low doses of dermorphin, a mu1 
receptor-mediated effect.
Paakkari P(1), Paakkari I, Sirén AL, Feuerstein G.

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Uniformed Services University of the Health 
Sciences, Bethesda, Maryland.
The selective opioid mu receptor agonist dermorphin increased the locomotor 
activity of rats dose dependently at 10 to 100 pmol/kg i.c.v.
Respiratory rate, 
relative tidal volume and respiratory minute volume also increased unrelated to 
changes in locomotor activity.
Higher doses, on the other hand, produced 
catalepsy and respiratory depression.
Pretreatment of the rats with the 
mu1-selective antagonist naloxonazine (10 mg/kg i.v.)
blocked the stimulant 
locomotor and respiratory effects of low doses of dermorphin (10-100 pmol/kg), 
but potentiated the respiratory depressant effect of a high dose (10 nmol/kg) of 
dermorphin.
The selective benzodiazepine antagonist flumazenil (5 mg/kg), which 
has been shown previously to antagonize catalepsy and respiratory depression 
produced by relatively high doses of dermorphin, did not antagonize the 
respiratory or locomotor stimulant effect of dermorphin.
The data suggest that 
mu1-opioid receptors are responsible for the low dose stimulant effects of 
dermorphin on locomotor activity and respiration whereas mu2 receptors mediate 
the respiratory depressant effect of dermorphin.
PMID: 1967644 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cholecystokinin and Psychiatric Disorders 1. CNS Drugs. 1997 Aug;8(2):134-52. doi: 10.2165/00023210-199708020-00005.

Cholecystokinin and psychiatric disorders : role in aetiology and potential of 
receptor antagonists in therapy.

Shlik J(1)
 Vasar E, Bradwejn J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia.
Cholecystokinin (CCK) is one of the most abundant neuropeptides in the brain.
It 
is found in the highest levels in cortical and limbic structures and also in the 
basal ganglia.
Two subtypes of CCK receptors have been described in the brain 
and gastrointestinal tissues.
CCK(A) (alimentary subtype) receptors are mainly 
located in the gastrointestinal tract, regulating secretion of enzymes from the 
pancreas and emptying of the gallbladder.
However, CCK(A) receptors are also 
found in several brain regions, with the highest densities in structures poorly 
protected by the haematoencephalic barrier (the area postrema, nucleus tractus 
solitarius and hypothalamus).
The distribution of CCK(B) (brain subtype) 
receptors overlaps with the localisation of CCK and its mRNA in different brain 
areas, with the highest densities in the cerebral cortex, basal ganglia, nucleus 
accumbens and forebrain limbic structures.Both subtype of CCK receptor belong to 
the guanine nucleotide-binding protein-(G protein)-linked receptor superfamily 
containing 7 transmembrane domains.
Signal transduction at CCK receptors is 
mediated via G(q) protein-related activation of phospholipase C and the 
formation of inositol 1,4,5-triphosphate (IP(3)) and 1,2-diacylglycerol (DAG).
Recent cloning of CCK(A) and CCK(B) receptors has shown that mRNA for both 
receptors is distributed in the same tissues as established in radioligand 
binding and receptor autoradiography studies, with few exceptions.The existence 
of multiple CCK receptors has fuelled the development of selective CCK(A) and 
CCK(B) receptor antagonists.
These antagonists belong to distinct chemical 
groups, including dibutyryl derivatives of cyclic nucleotides, amino acid 
derivatives, partial sequences and derivatives of the -COOH terminal sequence 
heptapeptides of CCK, benzodiazepine derivatives, 'peptoids' based on fragments 
of the CCK molecule, and pyrazolidinones.
At the present time, the compounds of 
choice for blockade of the CCK(A) receptor are lorglumide, devazepide and 
lintitript (SR27897).
L-365,260, CI-988, L-740,093 and LY288513 are the drugs 
most widely used to block CCK(B) receptors.Studies with CCK antagonists (and 
agonists) in animals and humans suggest a role for CCK in the regulation of 
anxiety and panic.
The administration of CCK agonists [ceruletide (caerulein), 
CCK-4, pentagastrin] has an anxiogenic action in various animal models and in 
different animal species.
However, the anxiogenic action of CCK agonists is 
restricted to nonconditioned (ethological) models of anxiety, with very limited 
activity in the 'classical' conditioned models.
Pharmacological studies have 
revealed that CCK(B) receptors are the key targets in the anxiogenic action of 
CCK agonists.
Nevertheless, CCK(B) antagonists displayed very little activity, 
if any at all, in these models, but strongly antagonised the effects of CCK(B) 
agonists.
The anxiogenic/panicogenic action of CCK(B) agonists (CCK-4, 
pentagastrin) is even more pronounced in human studies, but the effectiveness of 
CCK(B) antagonists as anxiolytics remains unclear.
Clinical trials performed to 
date have provided inconclusive data about the anxiolytic potential of CCK(B) 
receptor antagonists, probably because of limiting pharmacokinetic factors.The 
results of some animal experiments suggest a role for CCK in depression.
The 
administration of CCK(B) antagonists causes antidepressant-like action in mouse 
models of depression.
However, human studies replicating this result have yet to 
be carried out.A prominent biochemical alteration in schizophrenia is a 
reduction of CCK levels in the cerebral cortex.
This change may be related to 
the loss of cortical neurons, due to the schizophrenic process itself.
In animal 
studies (mainly in mice), administration of CCK agonists and antagonists has 
been shown to be effective in several models, reflecting a possible 
antipsychotic activity of these drugs.
However, the data obtained in human 
studies suggest that CCK agonists and antagonists do not improve the symptoms of 
schizophrenia.
Taking into account the reduced levels of CCK and its receptors 
found in schizophrenia, treatments increasing, but not blocking, brain CCK 
activity may be more appropriate.
DOI: 10.2165/00023210-199708020-00005
PMID: 23338219
Nampt is required for long-term depression and the function of GluN2B subunit-containing NMDA receptors 1. Brain Res Bull. 2015 Oct;119(Pt A):41-51. doi: 
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2015.10.005. Epub 2015 Oct 19.

Nampt is required for long-term depression and the function of GluN2B 
subunit-containing NMDA receptors.

Stein LR(1)
 Zorumski CF(2), Imai S(3), Izumi Y(4).
Author information:
(1)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Campus Box 8103, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; 
Department of Psychiatry, The Taylor Family Institute for Innovative Psychiatric 
Research, Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8134, 660 South 
Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
Electronic address: 
LianaLRoberts@gmail.com.
(2)Department of Psychiatry, The Taylor Family Institute for Innovative 
Psychiatric Research, Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8134, 
660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA; Department of Anatomy and 
Neurobiology, Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8134, 660 
South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
Electronic address: 
zorumskc@wustl.edu.
(3)Department of Developmental Biology, Washington University School of 
Medicine, Campus Box 8103, 660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
Electronic address: imaishin@wustl.edu.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, The Taylor Family Institute for Innovative 
Psychiatric Research, Washington University School of Medicine, Campus Box 8134, 
660 South Euclid Avenue, St. Louis, MO 63110, USA.
Electronic address: 
izumiy@wustl.edu.
Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide (NAD(+)) is an essential coenzyme/cosubstrate 
for many biological processes in cellular metabolism.
The rate-limiting step in 
the major pathway of mammalian NAD(+) biosynthesis is mediated by nicotinamide 
phosphoribosyltransferase (Nampt).
Previously, we showed that mice lacking Nampt 
in forebrain excitatory neurons (CamKIIαNampt(-/-) mice) exhibited 
hyperactivity, impaired learning and memory, and reduced anxiety-like behaviors.
However, it remained unclear if these functional effects were accompanied by 
synaptic changes.
Here, we show that CamKIIαNampt(-/-) mice have impaired 
induction of long-term depression (LTD) in the Schaffer collateral pathway, but 
normal induction of long-term potentiation (LTP), at postnatal day 30.
Pharmacological assessments demonstrated that CamKIIαNampt(-/-) mice also 
display dysfunction of synaptic GluN2B (NR2B)-containing N-methyl-d-aspartate 
receptors (NMDARs) prior to changes in NMDAR subunit expression.
These results 
support a novel, important role for Nampt-mediated NAD(+) biosynthesis in LTD 
and in the function of GluN2B-containing NMDARs.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2015.10.005
PMCID: PMC4672745
PMID: 26481044 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of interest: S.I.
is a co-founder of 
Metro Midwest Biotech.
C.Z.
serves on the scientific advisory board of Sage 
Therapeutics.
L.R.S.
and Y.I.
declare no competing financial interests.
Pre‐clinical and clinical evaluation of estramustine
 docetaxel and thalidomide combination in androgen‐independent prostate cancer <jats:sec><jats:title>OBJECTIVE</jats:title><jats:p>To evaluate the combination of docetaxel plus estramustine (which prolongs survival in patients with androgen‐independent prostate cancer, AIPC), and thalidomide (that also adds to docetaxel activity), both pre‐clinically and clinically in AIPC.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>PATIENTS, MATERIALS AND METHODS</jats:title><jats:p>In the pre‐clinical evaluation we injected PC3 cells subcutaneously into severely combined immunodeficient mice and started treatment after the tumour volume reached 50 mm<jats:sup>3</jats:sup>.
We also evaluated the combination using luciferase‐labelled PC3M‐luc‐C6 cells in nude mice.
We enrolled 20 patients with metastatic progressive AIPC into a phase II clinical trial to evaluate this combination.
Docetaxel (30 mg/m<jats:sup>2</jats:sup>) was administered every week, for 3 of 4 weeks.
The dose of thalidomide was 200 mg/day and estramustine was given three times a day at 1, 2, 3, 8, 9, 10, 15, 16 and 17 days.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>RESULTS</jats:title><jats:p>In the mice, thalidomide with docetaxel plus estramustine reduced tumour volume by 88% at 17 days vs the control treatment (<jats:italic>p</jats:italic> = 0.001).
The combination of docetaxel, estramustine and thalidomide nearly eradicated the signal from the luciferase‐expressing PC3M cells in the metastasis model.
Clinically, the progression‐free time was 7.2 months with this combination; 18 of 20 patients had a decline of half or more in prostate‐specific antigen level and two of 10 patients with soft‐tissue lesions had a partial response on computed tomography.
There were 24 grade 3 and two grade 4 complications associated with this combination.
There was a statistically significant association between overall survival and the CYP1B1*3 genotype (<jats:italic>P</jats:italic> = 0.013).</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>CONCLUSION</jats:title><jats:p>Docetaxel‐based chemotherapy is now regarded as a standard regimen for metastatic AIPC.
The combination of estramustine, docetaxel and thalidomide is an advantageous treatment in pre‐clinical models of prostate cancer and is a safe, tolerable and active regimen in patients with AIPC.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Hydrogen peroxide disrupts Ca2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum of rat skeletal muscle fibers <jats:p> Reactive oxygen species such as superoxide (O2-) and H2O2 are produced at low levels in resting muscles and at substantially higher levels in exercising muscles. Increased respiratory activity with exercise leads to O2- production by the NADPH oxidase reaction and the subsequent generation of H2O2 from O2- by spontaneous dismutation or by the superoxide dismutase reaction. The long-lasting (24-h) depression of contractile function after exercise has been linked to damage of one or more proteins important in the excitation-contraction coupling process. We studied mechanically and chemically skinned fibers from the extensor digitorum longus muscle of the rat to evaluate the effects of a 5-min exposure to 1.0 mM H2O2 on muscle function. We found that H2O2 had no effect on the isometric force-producing properties of the contractile apparatus or on Ca2+ uptake by the sarcoplasmic reticulum. It did
 however, significantly affect Ca2+ release from the sarcoplasmic reticulum.
Maximum depolarization-induced Ca2+ release was inhibited, and the sensitivity to depolarization was decreased.
Ca(2+)-induced release was completely blocked.
We conclude that elevated levels of H2O2 with exercise are capable of damaging one or more proteins of the excitation-contraction coupling process to produce a disruption in function that can account, at least in part, for the long-lasting effects of fatiguing stimulation.
</jats:p>
Haematology of subclinical fatty liver in dairy cows. 1. Res Vet Sci. 1984 Jul;37(1):63-5.

Haematology of subclinical fatty liver in dairy cows.

Reid IM
 Dew AM, Williams LA.
The relationship between liver fat content and haematology was investigated in 
369 cows from eight herds sampled in the second week after calving.
High levels 
of fat in the liver were associated with a depression in total white cell count 
and in neutrophils, eosinophils and lymphocytes.
There was no correlation 
between liver fat content and the percentage of E rosetting lymphocytes, packed 
cell volume or haemoglobin concentration.
The changes in peripheral white cell 
counts may be related to the increased incidence of post parturient disease in 
cows with fatty liver.
PMID: 6473916 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Diffusible gradients are out - an interview with Lewis Wolpert 1. Int J Dev Biol. 2009;53(5-6):659-62. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.072559mr.

Diffusible gradients are out - an interview with Lewis Wolpert. Interviewed by 
Richardson
 Michael K.

Wolpert L.

Comment in
    Int J Dev Biol.
2009;53(5-6):653-8. doi: 10.1387/ijdb.082594cc.
In 1969, Lewis Wolpert published a paper outlining his new concepts of "pattern 
formation" and "positional information".
He had already published research on 
the mechanics of cell membranes in amoebae, and a series of classic studies of 
sea urchin gastrulation with Trygve Gustavson.
Wolpert had presented his 1969 
paper a year earlier at a Woods Hole conference, where it received a very 
hostile reception: "I wasnt asked back to America for many years!".
But with 
Francis Crick lining up in support of diffusible morphogen gradients, positional 
information eventually became established as a guiding principle for research 
into biological pattern formation.
It is now clear that pattern formation is 
much more complex than could possibly have been imagined in 1969.
But Wolpert 
still believes in positional information, and regards intercalation during 
regeneration as its best supporting evidence.
However, he and others doubt that 
diffusible morphogen gradients are a plausible mechanism: "Diffusible gradients 
are too messy", he says.
Since his retirement, Lewis Wolpert has remained active 
as a theoretical biologist and continues to publish in leading journals.
He has 
also campaigned for a greater public understanding of the stigma of depression.
He was interviewed at home in London on July 26th, 2007 by Michael Richardson.
DOI: 10.1387/ijdb.072559mr
PMID: 19557674 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
RV instantaneous intraventricular diastolic pressure and velocity distributions in normal and volume overload awake dog disease models <jats:p> Intraventricular diastolic right ventricular (RV) flow field dynamics were studied by functional imaging using three-dimensional (3D) real-time echocardiography with sonomicrometry and computational fluid dynamics in seven awake dogs at control with normal wall motion (NWM) and RV volume overload with diastolic paradoxical septal motion. Burgeoning flow cross section between inflow anulus and chamber walls induces a convective pressure rise
 which represents a “convective deceleration load” (CDL).
High spatiotemporal resolution dynamic pressure and velocity distributions of the intraventricular RV flow field revealed time-dependent, subtle interactions between intraventricular local acceleration and convective pressure gradients.
During the E-wave upstroke, the total pressure gradient along intraventricular flow is the algebraic sum of a pressure decrease contributed by local acceleration and a pressure rise contributed by a convective deceleration that partially counterbalances the local acceleration gradient.
This underlies the smallness of early diastolic intraventricular gradients.
At peak volumetric inflow, local acceleration vanishes and the total adverse intraventricular gradient is convective.
During the E-wave downstroke, the strongly adverse gradient embodies the streamwise pressure augmentations from both local and convective decelerations.
It induces flow separation and large-scale vortical motions, stronger in NWM.
Their dynamic corollaries on intraventricular pressure and velocity distributions were ascertained.
In the NWM pattern, the strong ring-like vortex surrounding the central core encroaches on the area available for flow toward the apex.
This results in higher linear velocities later in the downstroke of the E wave than at peak inflow rate.
The augmentation of CDL by ventriculoannular disproportion may contribute to E wave and E-to-A ratio depression with chamber dilatation.
</jats:p>
MRI T<sub> 2</sub>  relaxometry of brain regions and cognitive dysfunction following electroconvulsive therapy 1. Indian J Psychiatry. 2007 Jul;49(3):195-9. doi: 10.4103/0019-5545.37321.

MRI T(2) relaxometry of brain regions and cognitive dysfunction following 
electroconvulsive therapy.

Kunigiri G(1)
 Jayakumar PN, Janakiramaiah N, Gangadhar BN.
Author information:
(1)Bradgate Mental Health Unit, Leicester, UK.
BACKGROUND: Although electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) causes no structural brain 
damage, recent studies reported altered brain perfusion acutely following ECT.
This is in keeping with brain edema which was noted in animal experiments 
following electroconvulsive shock.
AIM: This study examined alteration in magnetic resonance imaging (MRI) T(2) 
relaxation time, a measure of brain edema, and its relation to therapeutic 
efficacy, orientation and memory impairment with ECT.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Fifteen drug-naive consenting patients of major 
depressive disorder with melancholia (DSM-IV) received ECT as first-line 
treatment.
MRI scans were done before the first ECT and at 2 hours after the 
second ECT.
T(2) relaxation time was measured bilaterally in thalamus, 
hippocampus, medial temporal lobes and dorsolateral frontal cortex by a blind 
rater.
RESULTS: Depression scores and memory scores were reduced significantly both 
after the second and fifth ECT.
There was no change in T(2) relaxation time 
after second ECT.
CONCLUSION: The finding suggests that ECT does not produce demonstrable change 
acutely in brain parenchyma detectable by MRI scans.
DOI: 10.4103/0019-5545.37321
PMCID: PMC2902093
PMID: 20661386
The Hypoxic Mouse Model for Screening Cerebral Protective Agents 1. Anesth Analg. 1988 Oct;67(10):917-22.

The hypoxic mouse model for screening cerebral protective agents: a 
re-examination.

Milde LN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology
 Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN 55905.
The hypoxic mouse model, in which mice are subjected to an atmosphere of 5% O2 
in nitrogen, has been used to screen anesthetics for possible cerebral 
protection by measuring their ability to prolong survival in mice exposed to 
hypoxia.
Although prolonged survival time in this model is primarily due to a 
decreased cerebral metabolic rate produced by a specific anesthetic, results can 
also be influenced by body temperature, dose of anesthetic, and ventilatory or 
circulatory depression produced by the anesthetic.
Using the hypoxic mouse 
model, the effects of thiopental in conjunction with changes in ambient 
temperature, changes in thiopental dose, and the presence or absence of nitrous 
oxide (N2O) were examined.
Survival times were measured in eight groups of 
animals, either untreated animals or animals pretreated with 100 mg/kg 
thiopental intraperitoneally; exposed to hypoxia in the presence or absence of 
N2O; at ambient temperatures of either 25 degrees C or 35.5 degrees C. Survival 
times of seven additional groups of mice, either untreated or treated with doses 
of 50, 60, 70, 80, 90 or 120 mg/kg thiopental intraperitoneally, exposed to 
hypoxia in an ambient temperature of 35.5 degrees C were measured to determine a 
dose-response curve.
At an ambient temperature of 35.5 degrees C in which the 
rectal temperature of both untreated and thiopental-treated animals was 
maintained near 36 degrees C, thiopental-treated animals did not survive any 
longer than the untreated animals.
Exposure to N2O shortened survival times of 
both groups by approximately 20%.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 3421494 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Limits of spreading depression in pigeon striatum 1. J Comp Neurol. 1963 Dec;121:485-92. doi: 10.1002/cne.901210313.

LIMITS OF SPREADING DEPRESSION IN PIGEON STRIATUM.

SHIMA I
 FIFKOVA E, BURES J.

DOI: 10.1002/cne.901210313
PMID: 14100028 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The antidepressant-like effects of glutamatergic drugs ketamine and AMPA receptor potentiator LY 451646 are preserved in bdnf+/− heterozygous null mice 1. Neuropharmacology. 2012 Jan;62(1):391-7. doi:
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.08.015.  Epub 2011 Aug 16.

The antidepressant-like effects of glutamatergic drugs ketamine and AMPA 
receptor potentiator LY 451646 are preserved in bdnf⁺/⁻ heterozygous null mice.

Lindholm JS(1)
 Autio H, Vesa L, Antila H, Lindemann L, Hoener MC, Skolnick P, 
Rantamäki T, Castrén E.

Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Center, University of Helsinki, Helsinki, Finland.
Accumulating evidence suggests that biogenic amine-based antidepressants act, at 
least in part, via regulation of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) 
signaling.
Biogenic amine-based antidepressants increase BDNF synthesis and 
activate its signaling pathway through TrkB receptors.
Moreover, the 
antidepressant-like effects of these molecules are abolished in BDNF deficient 
mice.
Glutamate-based drugs, including the NMDA antagonist ketamine, and the 
AMPA receptor potentiator LY 451646, mimic the effects of antidepressants in 
preclinical tests with high predictive validity.
In humans, a single intravenous 
dose of ketamine produces an antidepressant effect that is rapid, robust and 
persistent.
In this study, we examined the role of BDNF in expression of the 
antidepressant-like effects of ketamine and an AMPA receptor potentiator (LY 
451646) in the forced swim test (FST).
Ketamine and LY 451646 produced 
antidepressant-like effects in the FST in mice at 45 min after a single 
injection, but no effects were observed one week after a single ketamine 
injection.
As previously reported, the effects of imipramine in the forced swim 
test were blunted in heterozygous BDNF knockout (bdnf(+/-)) mice.
However 
ketamine and LY 451646 produced similar antidepressant-like responses in 
wildtype and bdnf(+/-) mice.
Neither ketamine nor LY 451646 significantly 
influenced the levels BDNF or TrkB phosphorylation in the hippocampus when 
assessed at 45 min or 7 days after the drug administration.
These data 
demonstrate that under the conditions tested, neither ketamine nor the 
AMPA-potentiator LY 451656 activate BDNF signaling, but produce a characteristic 
antidepressant-like response in heterozygous bdnf(+/-) mice.
These data indicate 
that unlike biogenic amine-based agents, BDNF signaling does not play a pivotal 
role in the antidepressant effects of glutamate-based compounds.
This article is 
part of a Special Issue entitled 'Anxiety and Depression'.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2011.08.015
PMID: 21867718 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of NMDA NR2B antagonist on neuropathic pain in two spinal cord injury models 1. Pain. 2012 May;153(5):1022-1029. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.02.003. Epub 2012
Mar  15.

Effect of NMDA NR2B antagonist on neuropathic pain in two spinal cord injury 
models.

Kim Y(1)
 Cho HY, Ahn YJ, Kim J, Yoon YW.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience Research Institute, Korea 
University College of Medicine, Seoul, Republic of Korea BK21 Program, Korea 
University Graduate School, Seoul, Republic of Korea Department of Physical 
Therapy, College of Health Science, Seoul, Republic of Korea.
N-Methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors are thought to play an important role in 
the processes of central sensitization and pathogenesis of neuropathic pain, 
particularly after spinal cord injury (SCI).
NMDA antagonists effectively reduce 
neuropathic pain, but serious side effects prevent their use as therapeutic 
drugs.
NMDA NR2B antagonists have been reported to effectively reduce 
inflammatory and neuropathic pain.
In this study, we investigated the effects of 
NR2B antagonists on neuropathic pain and the expression of NR2B in the spinal 
cord in 2 SCI models.
SCI was induced at T12 by a New York University impactor 
(contusion) or by sectioning of the lateral half of the spinal cord 
(hemisection).
Ifenprodil (100, 200, 500, 1000nmol) and Ro25-6981 (20, 50, 100, 
200nmol) were intrathecally injected and behavioral tests were conducted.
Ifenprodil increased the paw withdrawal threshold in both models but also 
produced mild motor depression at higher doses.
Ro25-6981 increased the 
mechanical nociceptive threshold in a dose-dependent manner without motor 
depression.
NR2B expression was significantly increased on both sides at the 
spinal segments of L1-2 and L4-5 in the hemisection model but did not change in 
the contusion model.
Increased expression of NR2B in the hemisection model was 
reduced by intrathecal ifenprodil.
These results suggest that intrathecal NMDA 
NR2B antagonist increased the mechanical nociceptive threshold after SCI without 
motor depression.
A selective subtype of NMDA receptor, such as NR2B, may be a 
more selective target for pain control because NMDA receptors play a crucial 
role in the development and maintenance of chronic pain.
Copyright © 2012 International Association for the Study of Pain.
Published by 
Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pain.2012.02.003
PMID: 22424878 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Germ-cell mutagenesis and GSH depression in reproductive tissue of the F-344 rat induced by ethyl methanesulfonate 1. Mutat Res. 1985 Oct;144(2):93-8. doi: 10.1016/0165-7992(85)90009-0.

Germ-cell mutagenesis and GSH depression in reproductive tissue of the F-344 rat 
induced by ethyl methanesulfonate.

Teaf CM
 Harbison RD, Bishop JB.
Sensitivity of male F-344 rats to the dominant lethal (DL) mutagenic effect of 
ethyl methanesulfonate (EMS) was studied in conjunction with an evaluation of 
EMS-induced depression of glutathione (GSH) in testis, epididymis and vas 
deferens.
At the maximal effect, during week 3 (days 15-19 post-EMS), a dosage 
of 50 mg/kg caused 13.3% fetal death (FD) vs. 3.3% in controls, while 100 mg/kg 
caused 56.6% FD in the same interval.
EMS maximally depressed GSH to 33%, 54% 
and 77% of control in vas, epididymis and testis respectively.
The slope of the 
DL dose-response curve for EMS in rats shows a 3-4-fold greater sensitivity than 
that reported for mice.
The steepness of this curve suggests that small 
perturbations in endogenous protective mechanisms, such as GSH depression, may 
exert a greater proportional effect on germ-cell mutagenesis in rats which 
should be more readily observable than in mice.
EMS and other electrophilic 
toxicants may thus influence their own primary reproductive toxicity and/or that 
of other agents by depression of GSH in male reproductive tissue.
DOI: 10.1016/0165-7992(85)90009-0
PMID: 4047076 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of tetrodotoxin on the slowly adapting stretch receptor neurone of lobster <jats:p>1. A study has been made of the effects of tetrodotoxin on the impulse activity
 resting membrane potential, input resistance, and the generator potential and its after‐hyperpolarization of the slowly adapting stretch receptor neurone of the lobster.</jats:p><jats:p>2.
Tetrodotoxin was able to abolish completely within about 2 min the impulse activity in most cells, when given in a dose of 2 × 10<jats:sup>−8</jats:sup> g/ml., but in all cells, when administered in a dose of 4 × 10<jats:sup>−8</jats:sup> g/ml.
After blockage by the toxin in concentrations as high as 4 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> g/ml.
for periods of up to 30 min the action potential was restored by washing the preparation in physiological solution for 1 hr.</jats:p><jats:p>3.
In a concentration of 4 × 10<jats:sup>−8</jats:sup> g/ml.
tetrodotoxin produced within 1–2 min an average increase of 4·8 mV of the resting membrane potential and a simultaneous 47% reduction of the resting input resistance.
These effects were reversed by washing the preparation in physiological solution for 1 hr.</jats:p><jats:p>4.
Tetrodotoxin administered in doses as high as 4 × 10<jats:sup>−6</jats:sup> g/ml.
for periods of up to 30 min had no effect on the amplitude of the steady phase of the generator potential.</jats:p><jats:p>5.
In a concentration of 4 × 10<jats:sup>−8</jats:sup> g/ml.
tetrodotoxin produced within 5 min a 65% reduction of the amplitude of the hyperpolarization following the generator potential.
This effect was reversed by washing the preparation in physiological solution for 1 hr.</jats:p><jats:p>6.
The simultaneous increase in resting membrane potential and decrease in membrane resistance is suggested to be due to an elevated potassium permeability besides a reduced sodium conductance.
The constancy in height of the generator potential in the presence of a decreased membrane resistance makes necessary the assumption of an augmented generator current.
The decrease in amplitude of the hyperpolarization following the generator potential may be the result of an increase in potassium conductance and/or a reduction in acceleration of an electrogenic pump in consequence of a diminished sodium influx during the generator potential.</jats:p>
Interaction of diphenylhydantoin and some oral hypoglycemic drugs related to carbohydrate metabolism in rats. 1. Pol J Pharmacol Pharm. 1980 Jan-Feb;32(1):11-4.

Interaction of diphenylhydantoin and some oral hypoglycemic drugs related to 
carbohydrate metabolism in rats.

Shehata MM.

Daily treatment of rats with 50 or 100 mg/kg ip of diphenylhydantoin (DPH) for 3 
weeks caused a significant elevation of blood glucose level and reduction of 
hepatic glycogen content. In rats receiving daily oral doses of tolbutamide (100 
mg/kg) or phenformin (50 mg/kg) for the last 7 days of DPH treatment
 the blood 
glucose level did not differ from those in the control group; in rats receiving 
the low doses of DHP, the reduction in hepatic glycogen content was prevented by 
either hypoglycemic drug; in rats receiving the high dose of DPH in combination 
with the hypoglycemics the glycogen reduction was smaller than in rats receiving 
DPH alone.
A week's treatment with tolbutamide (100 mg/kg) alone resulted in a 
significant depression of the blood glucose level and elevation of hepatic 
glycogen content; phenformin (50 mg/kg) given alone for one week elevated the 
level of hepatic glycogen, but to a lesser degree than tolbutamide did, and did 
not affect the blood glucose level.
PMID: 7454606 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In vitro proliferation of normal and leukaemic human leukocytes controlled by an inhibitory endopeptide. 1. Folia Haematol Int Mag Klin Morphol Blutforsch. 1983;110(1):24-31.

In vitro proliferation of normal and leukaemic human leukocytes controlled by an 
inhibitory endopeptide.

Balázs A
 Mann J, Takácsi-Nagy L, Zimonyi I, Molnár A, Klupp T.

GI-3, an endogenous inhibitory fraction isolated from leukocytes, selectively 
inhibits the proliferation of granuloid precursor cells in a non-toxic manner.
Its active principle was determined as an acidic chlor-tolidine positive 
decapeptide [ 3 ].
The in vitro effect on normal and acute leukaemic human bone 
marrow and blood cells was examined.
A dose dependent inhibition by GI-3 of 
3H-TdR incorporation into myeloid cells of normal bone marrow was found, the 
sensitivity of human cells being higher than that of rat cells.
The 
proliferation of the target leukaemic bone marrow and blood cells (AML, AMMoL) 
was also decreased by the endogenous inhibitor in a dose dependent manner in 
untreated subjects as well as in patients in remission or relapse.
The rate of 
inhibition of leukaemic of well-known cytostatics (adriamycin hydrochloride, 
dianhydrogalactitol) applied for comparison.
Beyond its direct cytostatic 
effect, GI-3 could be used in the differential diagnosis of blastic leukaemias, 
complementing the routine cytochemical methods.
PMID: 6192050 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enduring Deficits in Brain Reward Function after Chronic Social Defeat in Rats: Susceptibility
 Resilience, and Antidepressant Response 1.
Biol Psychiatry.
2014 Oct 1;76(7):542-9. doi: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.01.013.
Epub 2014 Jan 31.
Enduring deficits in brain reward function after chronic social defeat in rats: 
susceptibility, resilience, and antidepressant response.
Der-Avakian A(1), Mazei-Robison MS(2), Kesby JP(1), Nestler EJ(3), Markou A(4).
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California.
(2)Department of Physiology, Michigan State University, East Lansing, Michigan.
(3)Fishberg Department of Neuroscience and Friedman Brain Institute, Icahn 
School of Medicine at Mount Sinai, New York, New York.
(4)Department of Psychiatry, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, 
California.
Electronic address: amarkou@ucsd.edu.
Comment in
    Biol Psychiatry.
2014 Oct 1;76(7):513-4. doi: 
10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.04.008.
BACKGROUND: Anhedonia, or diminished interest or pleasure in rewarding 
activities, characterizes depression and reflects deficits in brain reward 
circuitries.
Social stress induces anhedonia and increases risk of depression, 
although the effect of social stress on brain reward function is incompletely 
understood.
METHODS: This study assessed the following: 1) brain reward function in rats 
(using the intracranial self-stimulation procedure) and protein levels of 
brain-derived neurotrophic factor and related signaling molecules in response to 
chronic social defeat, 2) brain reward function during social defeat and 
long-term treatment with the antidepressants fluoxetine (5 mg/kg/day) and 
desipramine (10 mg/kg/day), and 3) forced swim test behavior after social defeat 
and fluoxetine treatment.
RESULTS: Social defeat profoundly and persistently decreased brain reward 
function, reflecting an enduring anhedonic response, in susceptible rats, 
whereas resilient rats showed no long-term brain reward deficits.
In the ventral 
tegmental area, social defeat, regardless of susceptibility or resilience, 
decreased brain-derived neurotrophic factor and increased phosphorylated AKT, 
whereas only susceptibility was associated with increased phosphorylated 
mammalian target of rapamycin.
Fluoxetine and desipramine reversed lower, but 
not higher, stress-induced brain reward deficits in susceptible rats.
Fluoxetine 
decreased immobility in the forced swim test, as did social defeat.
CONCLUSIONS: These results suggest that the differential persistent anhedonic 
response to psychosocial stress may be mediated by ventral tegmental area 
signaling molecules independent of brain-derived neurotrophic factor and 
indicate that greater stress-induced anhedonia is associated with resistance to 
antidepressant treatment.
Consideration of these behavioral and neurobiological 
factors associated with resistance to stress and antidepressant action may 
promote the discovery of novel targets to treat stress-related mood disorders.
Copyright © 2014 Society of Biological Psychiatry.
Published by Elsevier Inc. 
All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.biopsych.2014.01.013
PMCID: PMC4117827
PMID: 24576687 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: FINANCIAL DISCLOSURES: AD, MSM-R and JPK report 
no biomedical financial interests or potential conflicts of interest.
Effects of prostaglandins on the ATPase activities of synaptosomes 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1975 Feb 15;24(4):551-6. doi: 10.1016/0006-2952(75)90147-1.

Effects of prostaglandins on the ATPase activities of synaptosomes.

Gilbert JC
 Wyllie MG.

DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(75)90147-1
PMID: 122896 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adapted cold shower as a potential treatment for depression 1. Med Hypotheses. 2008;70(5):995-1001. doi: 10.1016/j.mehy.2007.04.052. Epub
2007  Nov 13.

Adapted cold shower as a potential treatment for depression.

Shevchuk NA(1).

Author information:
(1)Molecular Radiobiology Section
 The Department of Radiation Oncology, 
Virginia Commonwealth University School of Medicine, 401 College St, Richmond, 
VA 23298, USA.
nshevchuk@comcast.net

Depression is a debilitating mood disorder that is among the top causes of 
disability worldwide.
It can be characterized by a set of somatic, emotional, 
and behavioral symptoms, one of which is a high risk of suicide.
This work 
presents a hypothesis that depression may be caused by the convergence of two 
factors: (A) A lifestyle that lacks certain physiological stressors that have 
been experienced by primates through millions of years of evolution, such as 
brief changes in body temperature (e.g.
cold swim), and this lack of "thermal 
exercise" may cause inadequate functioning of the brain.
(B) Genetic makeup that 
predisposes an individual to be affected by the above condition more seriously 
than other people.
To test the hypothesis, an approach to treating depression is 
proposed that consists of adapted cold showers (20 degrees C, 2-3 min, preceded 
by a 5-min gradual adaptation to make the procedure less shocking) performed 
once or twice daily.
The proposed duration of treatment is several weeks to 
several months.
The following evidence appears to support the hypothesis: 
Exposure to cold is known to activate the sympathetic nervous system and 
increase the blood level of beta-endorphin and noradrenaline and to increase 
synaptic release of noradrenaline in the brain as well.
Additionally, due to the 
high density of cold receptors in the skin, a cold shower is expected to send an 
overwhelming amount of electrical impulses from peripheral nerve endings to the 
brain, which could result in an anti-depressive effect.
Practical testing by a 
statistically insignificant number of people, who did not have sufficient 
symptoms to be diagnosed with depression, showed that the cold hydrotherapy can 
relieve depressive symptoms rather effectively.
The therapy was also found to 
have a significant analgesic effect and it does not appear to have noticeable 
side effects or cause dependence.
In conclusion, wider and more rigorous studies 
would be needed to test the validity of the hypothesis.
DOI: 10.1016/j.mehy.2007.04.052
PMID: 17993252 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Benzimidazolyl-1
2,4-(H)-triazoles as central nervous system depressants 1.
J Med Chem.
1972 Sep;15(9):999-1000. doi: 10.1021/jm00279a033.
Benzimidazolyl-1,2,4(H)-triazoles as central nervous system depressants.
Parmar SS, Gupta AK, Singh HH, Gupta TK.
DOI: 10.1021/jm00279a033
PMID: 5051021 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Maintenance of meiotic arrest in bovine oocytes using the S-enantiomer of roscovitine: effects on maturation
 fertilization and subsequent embryo development in vitro <jats:p>The overall objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of the S-enantiomer of roscovitine (inhibitor of p34<jats:sup>cdc2</jats:sup>/cyclin B kinase) to maintain bovine cumulus–oocyte complexes at the germinal vesicle (GV) stage for extended times after removal from antral follicles without compromising subsequent maturation, fertilization and embryo development.
Oocytes were cultured in 0, 12.5, 25 or 50 μmol/l S-roscovitine for 24 h. Hoechst staining showed that 50 μmol/l S-roscovitine maintained &gt;90% of oocytes at the GV stage and inhibited gonadotropin-induced cumulus expansion.
Fewer oocytes underwent nuclear maturation after <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> maturation (Hoechst staining) when cultured in 50 μmol/l S-roscovitine for 66 versus 21 or 42 h. Zona pellucida (ZP) hardening (pronase resistance), cortical granule types (lens culinaris agglutinin–fluorescein isothiocyanate), nuclear maturation and fertilization with frozen-thawed spermatozoa (Hoechst staining) were assessed after culture of oocytes in 50 μmol/l S-roscovitine for 0, 24 or 48 h. Neither ZP hardening, nor nuclear maturation nor fertilization were altered by roscovitine culture for 48 h. A higher proportion of oocytes had a type III cortical granule pattern (premature translocation to the oolemma) after roscovitine culture for 48 h. However, embryo development was not compromised as cleavage, development to 8–16 cell and blastocyst stages were at least comparable in control and roscovitine-treated oocytes.
In conclusion, the studies have shown that S-roscovitine reversibly maintained bovine oocytes at the GV stage for 48 h. However, maintenance of oocytes in static culture for 48 h was not sufficient to improve development above non-treated controls.</jats:p>
The Functional Study of a Chinese Herbal Compounded Antidepressant Medicine – Jie Yu Chu Fan Capsule on Chronic Unpredictable Mild Stress Mouse Model 1. PLoS One. 2015 Jul 17;10(7):e0133405. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133405. 
eCollection 2015.

The Functional Study of a Chinese Herbal Compounded Antidepressant Medicine--Jie 
Yu Chu Fan Capsule on Chronic Unpredictable Mild Stress Mouse Model.

Ding L(1)
 Zhang X(1), Guo H(1), Yuan J(1), Li S(1), Hu W(1), Golden T(2), Wu 
N(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology, Beijing Chaoyang Hospital, Capital Medical 
University, Beijing, China.
(2)Department of Biological Sciences, Southeastern Oklahoma State University, 
Durant, Oklahoma, United States of America.
Jie Yu Chu Fan capsule (JYCF) is a new compounded Chinese herbal medicine for 
the treatment of depression.
The present study was designed to explore the 
antidepressant effects and the possible mechanisms of JYCF by using chronic 
unpredictable mild stress (CUMS) mouse model and comparing results to that of 
fluoxetine.
Behavioral tests including an open field test, sucrose preference 
test and forced swim test were performed to evaluate the antidepressant effects 
of JYCF.
The concentrations of monoamine neurotransmitters and metabolic 
products including norepinephrine (NE), 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT), dopamine 
(DA), 5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid (5-HIAA), homovanillic acid (HVA) and 
3,4-dihydroxyphenylacetic acid (DOPAC) in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus of 
mice were determined by means of high performance liquid chromatography with 
electrochemical detection (HPLC-EC).
The results show that a successful mouse 
CUMS model was established through 5 weeks of continuous unpredictable 
stimulation, as indicated by the significant decrease in sucrose preference and 
locomotor activity and increase in immobility time in the forced swim test.
Chronic treatment of JYCF (1.25, 2.5 and 5 g/kg) and fluoxetine (20 mg/kg) 
significantly reversed the CUMS-induced behavioral abnormalities.
JYCF (1.25, 
2.5 and 5 g/kg) significantly increased NE in CUMS mouse prefrontal cortex (P < 
0.01, P < 0.01, P < 0.05 respectively) and 5-HT in hippocampus (P < 0.05).
In 
summary, our findings suggest that JYCF exerts comparable antidepressant-like 
effects to that of fluoxetine in CUMS mice.
Besides, the antidepressant-like 
effect of JYCF is mediated by the increase of monoaminergic transmitters 
including 5-HT and NE.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0133405
PMCID: PMC4506077
PMID: 26186537 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
The role of neurotensin in physiologic and pathologic processes 1. Curr Opin Endocrinol Diabetes Obes. 2011 Feb;18(1):75-82. doi: 
10.1097/MED.0b013e3283419052.

The role of neurotensin in physiologic and pathologic processes.

Mustain WC(1)
 Rychahou PG, Evers BM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kentucky, Lexington, Kentucky, USA.
PURPOSE OF REVIEW: Neurotensin is a 13-amino acid peptide found in the central 
nervous system central nervous system and the gastrointestinal tract.
Since its 
initial discovery in 1973, neurotensin has been shown to play a role in a wide 
range of physiologic and pathologic processes throughout the body.
Ongoing 
research efforts continue to clarify the role of neurotensin in various central 
nervous system and gastrointestinal processes, as well as how disruption of 
these normal mechanisms may lead to diseases ranging from schizophrenia to 
colorectal cancer.
The goal of this review is to provide an overview of the most 
recent advances in the field of neurotensin research, in the context of what has 
been previously published.
RECENT FINDINGS: Because of the seemingly unrelated functions of neurotensin in 
the central nervous system and the periphery, the scope of the articles reviewed 
is rather broad.
Contributions continue to be made to our understanding of the 
downstream effects of neurotensin signaling and the complex feedback loops 
between neurotensin and other signaling molecules.
By selective targeting or 
blockade of specific neurotensin receptors, investigators have identified 
potential drugs for use in the treatment of schizophrenia, alcoholism, chronic 
pain, or cancer.
Neurotensin-based pharmacologic agents are being used 
successfully in animal models for a number of these conditions.
SUMMARY: The review highlights the wide array of biological processes in which 
neurotensin has a role, and summarizes the most recent advances in various 
fields of neurotensin research.
The knowledge gained through this research has 
led to the development of first-in-class drugs for the treatment of various 
medical conditions, and it is clear that in the coming years some of these 
agents will be ready to move from the bench to the bedside in clinical trials.
DOI: 10.1097/MED.0b013e3283419052
PMID: 21124211 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long-lasting suppression of alcohol preference in rats following serotonin receptor blockade by ritanserin 1. Brain Res Bull. 1992 Mar;28(3):493-6. doi: 10.1016/0361-9230(92)90052-y.

Long-lasting suppression of alcohol preference in rats following serotonin 
receptor blockade by ritanserin.

Panocka I(1)
 Massi M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Behavioral Physiology, Polish Academy of Sciences, Mrokow.
Rats with developed preference for 3% ethanol were injected subcutaneously (SC) 
with 10 mg/kg of the 5HT2 antagonist ritanserin for 9 days.
This resulted in a 
marked and significant suppression of alcohol preference, as compared to 
controls.
The effect was very long-lasting, as shown by the fact that it was 
still evident up to 20 days after the end of the treatment.
Since ritanserin 
shows some affinity also for D2-dopaminergic receptors (even though much lower 
than for 5HT2 receptors), for comparison, other rats were injected SC for 9 days 
with 0.0625 mg/kg of haloperidol or with its vehicle.
The effect of haloperidol 
treatment was low and short-lasting.
Depletion of endogenous serotonin by 
p-chlorophenylalanine (600 mg/kg x 3 days) completely abolished the suppression 
of alcohol preference by ritanserin.
These results suggest that: 1) the 
ritanserin-induced reduction of alcohol preference is not due to dopaminergic 
blockade, 2) that the effect of ritanserin is completely dependent on the 
endogenous serotoninergic mechanisms.
DOI: 10.1016/0361-9230(92)90052-y
PMID: 1534269 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Studies on cerebral circulation with intracerebral rheography]. 1. Nihon Geka Hokan. 1971 May 1;40(1):45-79.

[Studies on cerebral circulation with intracerebral rheography].

[Article in Japanese]

Sato O.

PMID: 5106425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The hypoxic preconditioning effect upon expression of the NGFI-A transcription factor in the rat brain following an unavoidable stess in the "learned helpnessness" model]. 1. Ross Fiziol Zh Im I M Sechenova. 2009 Apr;95(4):405-16.

[The hypoxic preconditioning effect upon expression of the NGFI-A transcription 
factor in the rat brain following an unavoidable stess in the "learned 
helpnessness" model].

[Article in Russian]

Baranova KA
 Rybnikova EA, Mironova VI, Samoĭlov MO.
In this study, by an immunocytochemistry it is established that development of 
the depression after an inescapable stress in the learned helplessness model in 
rats is associated with stable induction of the transcription factor NGFI-A in 
the dorsal hippocampus (CA1 field) and in the paraventricular hypothalamic 
magnocellular nucleus (PVNm), as well as with rapid and transient stress-induced 
expression of NGFI-A in the dentate gyrus and, supported on high level till 5 
days, in the neocortex.
Hypoxic preconditioning using mild repetitive hypobaric 
hypoxia (360 Torr for 2 hrs each of 3 days) prevented development of the 
depressive state in rats, and considerably changed the dynamics of the NGFI-A 
immunoreactivity in the hippocampus: the stable increase of an expression in the 
dentate gyrus and only transitory and delayed (for 5 day) in the CA1 field was 
detected.
In the neocortex (Layer II) the stress influence was levelled with 
preconditioning by preventing the prolongation of the first wave of expression 
NGFI-A untill 5 days, and in PVNm, on the contrary, was stimulated the second 
(delayed) wave of an expression of this transcription factor.
The pattern of 
NGFI-A expression in the hippocampus, neocortex and hypothalamus of 
preconditioned rats revealed an obvious pathological response to aversive 
stress, which results in development of depressive frustration rather than the 
adaptation.
Stress-induced modifications of early gene product NGFI-A expression 
in the brain caused by hypoxic preconditioning, possibly, play important role in 
tolerance to hard psychoemotional stresses and may be an important part of 
antidepressive mechanisms.
PMID: 19505043 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Heterogeneous processing of amygdala and hippocampal inputs in the rostral and caudal subregions of the nucleus accumbens 1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2011 Nov;14(10):1301-14. doi: 
10.1017/S1461145710001586. Epub 2011 Jan 7.

Heterogeneous processing of amygdala and hippocampal inputs in the rostral and 
caudal subregions of the nucleus accumbens.

Gill KM(1)
 Grace AA.
Author information:
(1)Departments of Neuroscience, Psychiatry and Psychology, University of 
Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, USA.
gillkm@pitt.edu

The nucleus accumbens (NAc) receives converging input from a number of 
structures proposed to play a role in affective disorders.
In particular, the 
basolateral amygdala (BLA) provides an affective input that overlaps with 
context-related information derived from the ventral subiculum of the 
hippocampus (vSub).
We examined how stimulation of the BLA is modulated by, and 
in turn affects, vSub inputs to this region.
In-vivo extracellular recordings 
were performed in the NAc of anaesthetized rats.
The effect of high-frequency 
(theta-burst) stimulation (HFS) of the BLA on both BLA and vSub-evoked responses 
was tested.
In addition, the involvement of dopamine D2 receptors in BLA-induced 
plasticity in the NAc was examined by pre-treatment with sulpiride (5 mg/kg 
i.v.).
Finally, tetrodotoxin (TTX) was used to inactivate the vSub and the 
effect on BLA-evoked responses was assessed.
We found that HFS of the BLA causes 
hetereogeneous patterns of plasticity, depression and potentiation, 
respectively, in the rostral and caudal subregions of the NAc that are disrupted 
following D2 receptor antagonist treatment.
In addition, inactivating the vSub 
with TTX attenuates the ability of the BLA to drive spike firing in the NAc.
Thus, the vSub is required for activation of the NAc by the BLA.
These data 
support a model whereby the amygdala can coordinate reward-seeking and 
fear-related behaviours via its differential regulation of NAc output.
In 
addition, the hippocampus inappropriately dominates information processing 
within this circuit, potentially contributing to the overwhelming focus on 
internal emotional states in disorders such as depression.
DOI: 10.1017/S1461145710001586
PMCID: PMC3197957
PMID: 21211108 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Statement of Interest: None
16
16-Dimethyl prostaglandin E2 alleviates jejunal microvascular effects of ethanol but not the ethanol-induced inhibition of water, sodium, and glucose absorption 1.
Gastroenterology.
1988 Mar;94(3):726-32. doi: 10.1016/0016-5085(88)90246-6.
16,16-Dimethyl prostaglandin E2 alleviates jejunal microvascular effects of 
ethanol but not the ethanol-induced inhibition of water, sodium, and glucose 
absorption.
Leddin DJ(1), Ray M, Dinda PK, Prokopiw I, Beck IT.
Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, Queen's University, Hotel Dieu Hospital, Kingston, 
Ontario, Canada.
To examine the relation between ethanol-induced microvascular and absorptive 
changes, we have investigated the effect of 16,16-dimethyl prostaglandin E2 on 
the jejunal intraluminal plasma albumin loss (which was taken as a measure of 
microvascular changes) and the inhibition of water, sodium, and glucose 
transport caused by intraluminal ethanol.
A group of 8 dogs received 
intravenously 16,16-dimethyl prostaglandin E2 at a dose of 0.1 microgram/kg as a 
bolus followed by 0.05 microgram/kg.hour for 2 h (prostaglandin-treated group).
A second group of 8 dogs received no 16,16-dimethyl prostaglandin E2 (untreated 
group).
In each dog of both groups, one jejunal segment was perfused with an 
ethanol-free solution (control segment) and an adjacent segment was perfused 
with the same solution containing 6% (wt/vol) ethanol (ethanol-perfused 
segment).
The albumin loss (mg/g dry gut wt.90 min, mean +/- SE) by the control 
and the ethanol-perfused segments was 0.76 +/- 0.23 and 8.29 +/- 1.27, 
respectively, in the untreated group, and 0.66 +/- 0.23 and 4.81 +/- 0.67, 
respectively, in the prostaglandin-treated group.
The ethanol-induced increase 
in albumin loss was significant in both groups, but was significantly lower (p 
less than 0.05) in the prostaglandin-treated group than in the untreated group.
Intraluminal ethanol depressed net water, sodium, and glucose transport by 74%, 
52%, and 22%, respectively, in the untreated group, and by 92%, 65%, and 38%, 
respectively, in the prostaglandin-treated group.
The magnitude of this 
depression did not differ significantly between the two groups.
As 
16,16-dimethyl prostaglandin E2 attenuated the ethanol-induced plasma albumin 
loss, but not the inhibition of water, sodium, or glucose transport, we conclude 
that the microvascular and the absorptive changes produced by ethanol are not 
mediated by the same mechanism.
DOI: 10.1016/0016-5085(88)90246-6
PMID: 3338641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The neurological manifestations of Gaucher disease type 1: the French Observatoire on Gaucher disease (FROG) <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:sec><jats:title>Background</jats:title><jats:p>Gaucher disease (GD)
 the most prevalent inherited lysosomal storage disorder, is caused by deficient glucocerebrosidase activity.
Type 1 GD (GD1), the most common variant, is classically considered non‐neuronopathic.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Methods</jats:title><jats:p>We performed a national cross‐sectional observational survey—the French Observatoire on Gaucher Disease (FROG)—in patients with GD1 between March 2005 and September 2006.
The study included all patients over 18 years of age with confirmed GD1 who attended participating centers for regular follow‐up.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p>One hundred and five patients were included, in whom we studied the prevalence and characteristics of relevant neurological symptoms associated with the neuraxis.
Of these, 51 (49%) GD1 patients presented at least one neurological symptom.
Four patients (4%) had Parkinson disease and 22 (21%) presented with at least one parkinsonian sign or at least one sign frequently associated with Parkinson disease.
Five patients (5%) had a previous diagnosis of peripheral neuropathy.
Other central nervous system symptoms were recorded in 20 (19%) patients and other peripheral nervous system symptoms in 39 (37%) patients.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title><jats:p>These data challenge the current classification of GD, and suggest that the three forms of GD each involve a different profile of neurological manifestations.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Interference with the humoral immune response in diverse genetic lines of chickens 1. Vet Immunol Immunopathol. 1988 Dec;20(1):53-60. doi: 
10.1016/0165-2427(88)90025-6.

Interference with the humoral immune response in diverse genetic lines of 
chickens. I. The effect of carrageenan.

Van der Zijpp AJ(1)
 Scott TR, Glick B, Kreukniet MB.
Author information:
(1)Agricultural University, Department of Animal Husbandry, Wageningen, The 
Netherlands.
Two experiments were conducted in which the effect of carrageenan (CGN) on 
humoral immune response of chicks selected on either high (H) or low (L) 
antibody production to sheep red blood cells (SRBC) was determined.
H and L line 
chicks were injected i.p.
with different doses of CGN prior to immunization with 
SRBC or Brucella abortus (BA).
Four weeks later chicks were reimmunized with the 
same antigens.
In general, control H and L chicks had significantly higher total 
anti-SRBC titers than CGN-treated chicks in primary response.
Also, total 
anti-BA titers were significantly higher in control chicks than CGN-treated 
chicks on days 3 and 5 following primary immunization and on days 0 and 7 of the 
secondary response.
Overall, the 2-mercaptoethanol (2ME)-resistant anti-SRBC 
titers did not differ significantly among the CGN-treated groups.
However, 
control chicks tended to have higher anti-BA 2ME-resistant titers from day 14 
p.i.
of primary response on.
Regardless of antigen or CGN treatment, the H line 
chicks had significantly higher titers than L line chicks.
However, the CGN 
treatments did not affect the antibody response to BA nor to SRBC differently 
between L and H line chicks.
It would appear that since CGN is cytotoxic for 
macrophages, selection for antibody production did not result in different 
abilities of the macrophages of these chicken lines to respond to an antigenic 
challenge.
DOI: 10.1016/0165-2427(88)90025-6
PMID: 3149069 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Experimental infection of chickens
 ducks and quails with the highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza virus 1.
J Vet Sci.
2009 Mar;10(1):53-60. doi: 10.4142/jvs.2009.10.1.53.
Experimental infection of chickens, ducks and quails with the highly pathogenic 
H5N1 avian influenza virus.
Jeong OM(1), Kim MC, Kim MJ, Kang HM, Kim HR, Kim YJ, Joh SJ, Kwon JH, Lee YJ.
Author information:
(1)National Veterinary Research and Quarantine Service, Anyang 430-824, Korea.
Highly pathogenic avian influenza viruses (HPAIV) of the H5N1 subtype have 
spread since 2003 in poultry and wild birds in Asia, Europe and Africa.
In 
Korea, the highly pathogenic H5N1 avian influenza outbreaks took place in 
2003/2004, 2006/2007 and 2008.
As the 2006/2007 isolates differ phylogenetically 
from the 2003/2004 isolates, we assessed the clinical responses of chickens, 
ducks and quails to intranasal inoculation of the 2006/2007 index case virus, 
A/chicken/Korea/IS/06.
All the chickens and quails died on 3 days and 3-6 days 
post-inoculation (DPI), respectively, whilst the ducks only showed signs of mild 
depression.
The uninoculated chickens and quails placed soon after with the 
inoculated flock died on 5.3 and 7.5 DPI, respectively.
Both oropharyngeal and 
cloacal swabs were taken for all three species during various time intervals 
after inoculation.
It was found that oropharyngeal swabs showed higher viral 
titers than in cloacal swabs applicable to all three avian species.
The chickens 
and quails shed the virus until they died (up to 3 to 6 days after inoculation, 
respectively) whilst the ducks shed the virus on 2-4 DPI.
The postmortem tissues 
collected from the chickens and quails on day 3 and days 4-5 and from clinically 
normal ducks that were euthanized on day 4 contained the virus.
However, the 
ducks had significantly lower viral titers than the chickens or quails.
Thus, 
the three avian species varied significantly in their clinical signs, mortality, 
tissue virus titers, and duration of virus shedding.
Our observations suggest 
that duck and quail farms should be monitored particularly closely for the 
presence of HPAIV so that further virus transmission to other avian or mammalian 
hosts can be prevented.
DOI: 10.4142/jvs.2009.10.1.53
PMCID: PMC2801098
PMID: 19255524 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Overexpression of Adenosine A2A Receptors in Rats: Effects on Depression
 Locomotion, and Anxiety 1.
Front Psychiatry.
2014 Jun 13;5:67. doi: 10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00067.
eCollection
 2014.
Overexpression of Adenosine A2A Receptors in Rats: Effects on Depression, 
Locomotion, and Anxiety.
Coelho JE(1), Alves P(2), Canas PM(3), Valadas JS(1), Shmidt T(4), Batalha 
VL(1), Ferreira DG(1), Ribeiro JA(5), Bader M(4), Cunha RA(3), do Couto FS(2), 
Lopes LV(1).
Author information:
(1)Faculty of Medicine of Lisbon, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, University of 
Lisbon , Lisbon , Portugal.
(2)Faculty of Medicine of Lisbon, Institute of Pharmacology and Neurosciences, 
University of Lisbon , Lisbon , Portugal.
(3)CNC-Center for Neurosciences and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra , 
Coimbra , Portugal ; Faculty of Medicine, University of Coimbra , Coimbra , 
Portugal.
(4)Max-Delbrück-Center for Molecular Medicine (MDC) , Berlin , Germany.
(5)Faculty of Medicine of Lisbon, Instituto de Medicina Molecular, University of 
Lisbon , Lisbon , Portugal ; Faculty of Medicine of Lisbon, Institute of 
Pharmacology and Neurosciences, University of Lisbon , Lisbon , Portugal.
Adenosine A2A receptors (A2AR) are a sub-type of receptors enriched in basal 
ganglia, activated by the neuromodulator adenosine, which interact with dopamine 
D2 receptors.
Although this reciprocal antagonistic interaction is 
well-established in motor function, the outcome in dopamine-related behaviors 
remains uncertain, in particular in depression and anxiety.
We have demonstrated 
an upsurge of A2AR associated to aging and chronic stress.
Furthermore, 
Alzheimer's disease patients present A2AR accumulation in cortical areas 
together with depressive signs.
We now tested the impact of overexpressing A2AR 
in forebrain neurons on dopamine-related behavior, namely depression.
Adult male 
rats overexpressing human A2AR under the control of CaMKII promoter 
[Tg(CaMKII-hA2AR)] and aged-matched wild-types (WT) of the same strain 
(Sprague-Dawley) were studied.
The forced swimming test (FST), sucrose 
preference test (SPT), and the open-field test (OFT) were performed to evaluate 
behavioral despair, anhedonia, locomotion, and anxiety.
Tg(CaMKII-hA2AR) animals 
spent more time floating and less time swimming in the FST and presented a 
decreased sucrose preference at 48 h in the SPT.
They also covered higher 
distances in the OFT and spent more time in the central zone than the WT.
The 
results indicate that Tg(CaMKII-hA2AR) rats exhibit depressive-like behavior, 
hyperlocomotion, and altered exploratory behavior.
This A2AR overexpression may 
explain the depressive signs found in aging, chronic stress, and Alzheimer's 
disease.
DOI: 10.3389/fpsyt.2014.00067
PMCID: PMC4055866
PMID: 24982640
Effects of exogenous antioxidants on the levels of endogenous antioxidants
 lipid-soluble fluorescent material and life span in the housefly, Musca domestica 1.
Mech Ageing Dev.
1985 Sep;31(3):329-36. doi: 10.1016/0047-6374(85)90098-3.
Effects of exogenous antioxidants on the levels of endogenous antioxidants, 
lipid-soluble fluorescent material and life span in the housefly, Musca 
domestica.
Sohal RS, Allen RG, Farmer KJ, Newton RK, Toy PL.
Effects of exogenous antioxidant administration (0.5% and 2% ascorbate, 
beta-carotene and alpha-tocopherol in sucrose) on life-span, metabolic rate, 
activities of superoxide dismutase and catalase, levels of glutathione, 
inorganic peroxides and chloroform-soluble fluorescent material (lipofuscin) 
were examined in adult male houseflies.
Administration of antioxidants at a 
level of 0.5% did not affect life-span, whereas, 2% ascorbate and 
alpha-tocopherol decreased average life-span.
Metabolic rate of flies was 
unaffected, except by 2% ascorbate, which caused a decrease.
Superoxide 
dismutase activity was depressed by 2% ascorbate at all ages, and by 
beta-carotene and alpha-tocopherol in older flies.
Catalase activity was 
unaffected except by alpha-tocopherol at younger ages.
Glutathione concentration 
was decreased by ascorbate and beta-carotene at both concentrations 
administered.
Inorganic peroxides (H2O2) were increased by 2% beta-carotene and 
alpha-tocopherol.
Only high concentrations of ascorbate and beta-carotene 
decreased the level of soluble fluorescent material.
Results suggest that 
administration of exogenous antioxidants causes a compensatory depression of 
endogenous defenses.
DOI: 10.1016/0047-6374(85)90098-3
PMID: 4068768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of thermal stress on physiological parameters
 feed intake and plasma thyroid hormones concentration in Alentejana, Mertolenga, Frisian and Limousine cattle breeds 1.
Int J Biometeorol.
2008 Jan;52(3):199-208. doi: 10.1007/s00484-007-0111-x.
Epub  2007 Jun 20.
Effect of thermal stress on physiological parameters, feed intake and plasma 
thyroid hormones concentration in Alentejana, Mertolenga, Frisian and Limousine 
cattle breeds.
Pereira AM(1), Baccari F Jr, Titto EA, Almeida JA.
Author information:
(1)Instituto de Ciências Agrárias Mediterrânicas, Universidade de Evora, 
Portugal.
apereira@uevora.pt

The aim of the present study was to assess the heat tolerance of animals of two 
Portuguese (Alentejana and Mertolenga) and two exotic (Frisian and Limousine) 
cattle breeds, through the monitoring of physiological acclimatization reactions 
in different thermal situations characterized by alternate periods of 
thermoneutrality and heat stress simulated in climatic chambers.
In the 
experiment, six heifers of the Alentejana, Frisian and Mertolenga breeds and 
four heifers of the Limousine breed were used.
The increase in chamber 
temperatures had different consequences on the animals of each breed.
When 
submitted to heat stress, the Frisian animals developed high thermal polypnea 
(more than 105 breath movements per minute), which did not prevent an increase 
in the rectal temperature (from 38.7 degrees C to 40.0 degrees C).
However, only 
a slight depression in food intake and in blood thyroid hormone concentrations 
was observed under thermal stressful conditions.
Under the thermal stressful 
conditions, Limousine animals decreased food intake by 11.4% and blood 
triiodothyronine (T3) hormone concentration decreased to 76% of the level 
observed in thermoneutral conditions.
Alentejana animals had similar reactions.
The Mertolenga cattle exhibited the highest capacity for maintaining 
homeothermy: under heat stressful conditions, the mean thermal polypnea 
increased twofold, but mean rectal temperature did not increase.
Mean food 
intake decreased by only 2% and mean T3 blood concentration was lowered to 85,6% 
of the concentration observed under thermoneutral conditions.
These results lead 
to the conclusion that the Frisian animals had more difficulty in tolerating 
high temperatures, the Limousine and Alentejana ones had an intermediate 
difficulty, and the Mertolenga animals were by far the most heat tolerant.
DOI: 10.1007/s00484-007-0111-x
PMID: 17578605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Abnormal 5-HT modulation of stress behaviors in the Kv4.2 knockout mouse 1. Neuroscience. 2010 Nov 10;170(4):1086-97. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.08.047. Epub 2010 Aug 27.

Abnormal 5-HT modulation of stress behaviors in the Kv4.2 knockout mouse.

Lockridge A(1)
 Su J, Yuan LL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroscience, University of Minnesota, Minneapolis, MN, USA.
The Kv4.2 gene codes for an essential subunit of voltage-gated A-type potassium 
channels that are involved in dendritic signal integration and synaptic 
plasticity.
Detailed cellular characterization in CA1 pyramidal neurons of the 
hippocampus has shown that knocking out the Kv4.2 gene increases neuronal 
excitability and promotes long-term potentiation.
However, the overall 
behavioral consequences of these modifications have not been fully explored.
Given the growing connection between neuronal plasticity and affect processing 
in the hippocampus and other Kv4.2 expressing regions, we proposed to 
investigate whether the absence of this gene would alter the stress response of 
mice to the forced swimming and tail suspension tests (TSTs) for depression-like 
behavior.
Kv4.2 knockout (KO) mice, generated in the 129SvEv background, 
demonstrated elevated immobility and a loss of swimming, as well as 
antidepressant resistance to the selective 5-HT reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine 
(FLX).
Characterization of a relatively new head movement behavior category, 
responsive to serotonergic treatment in wildtype (WT) mice, supported 
conclusions of abnormal 5-HT modulation.
Electrophysiology recordings in the 
prefrontal cortex showed a blunting of postsynaptic response to direct 5-HT 
application following a single period of swim stress only in the animals without 
the Kv4.2 subunit.
Based on our findings, we hypothesize that Kv4.2 KO mice may 
have an exaggerated 5-HT response to stress leading to a premature 
desensitization of postsynaptic receptors and a loss of continued behavior 
modulation.
These results may shed some light on the involvement of A-type 
potassium channels in the effective action of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitor (SSRI) antidepressants.
Copyright © 2010 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2010.08.047
PMID: 20801198 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Zentral dämpfende Wirkstoffe
 7.
Mitt.
Kernsubstituierte (Diallylamino)‐1,3,5‐triazine <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Aus der Umsetzung von 2,4‐Dichlor‐6‐(diallylamino)‐1,3,5‐triazin (<jats:bold>1</jats:bold>) mit langkettigen primären (<jats:bold>2a‐b</jats:bold>) und cyclischen sekundären (<jats:bold>2c‐f</jats:bold>) Aminen gehen die kernsubstituierten Chlor‐diallylamino‐1,3,5‐triazine (<jats:bold>3a‐f</jats:bold>) hervor.
Ein für Strukturtyp <jats:bold>3</jats:bold> charakteristischer ms Fragmentierungsweg beinhaltet die Umbildung der Diallylaminogruppe zum Aziridinring.
Unter den neu entwickelten Verbindungen findet sich zentral dämpfende Wirksamkeit besonders in <jats:bold>3a</jats:bold> ausgeprägt.
Darüber hinaus weist Strukturtyp <jats:bold>3</jats:bold> Antiprotozoen‐, anthelminthische und insektenwachstumsregulatorische Wirkung auf.</jats:p>
Effects of Imipramine on T Cell Subsets in Olfactory Bulbectomized Mice <jats:p>To elucidate the immunological outcome in antidepressant therapy
 the effects of acute or chronic imipramine (IMP) treatment on T cell subsets were examined in sham-operated (SO) and olfactory bulbectomized (OB) mice.
Olfactory bulbectomy decreased the ratio of Lyt2-positive suppressor T cells to L3T4-positive T helper cells.
Acute IMP treatment did not exert any effect on the ratio in SO nor in OB mice.
Chronic IMP administration was found to significantly increase the ratio in SO and OB mice and, as a result, the ratio was significantly higher in SO mice compared with the control, while the ratio was normalized in OB mice.
The present study may be suggestive of the immune activation in depression and of the immunosuppressive effects of antidepressants.</jats:p>
Acute stress‐mediated increases in extracellular glutamate levels in the rat amygdala: differential effects of antidepressant treatment <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Depressive illness is associated with changes in amygdalar volume
 and stressful life events are known to precipitate depressive episodes in this patient population.
Stress affects amygdalar synaptic plasticity and several neurotransmitter systems have been implicated in stress‐mediated changes in the brain, including the glutamatergic system.
However, the role of the glutamatergic system in stress‐mediated plasticity in the amygdala remains to be determined.
Accordingly the current study examined the stress modulation of extracellular glutamate levels in the basolateral nucleus (BLA) and the central nucleus (CeA) of the amygdala by <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> microdialysis.
Acute stress increased extracellular glutamate levels in the BLA and CeA, although the dynamics of these stress‐mediated changes were dramatically different in these amygdalar nuclei.
Tetrodotoxin administration reduced basal, and completely eliminated stress‐mediated increases in glutamate efflux in the amygdala, demonstrating that stress effects are dependent on local axonal depolarization.
Moreover, stress‐mediated increases in glutamate efflux in the BLA were inhibited by the antidepressant tianeptine but not by the selective serotonin‐reuptake inhibitor fluoxetine.
Collectively, these data demonstrate that stress‐induced modulation of glutamate neurochemistry reflects a fundamental pathological change that may contribute to the aetiology and progression of depressive illness, and suggest that some antidepressants such as tianeptine may elicit their clinical effects by modulation of glutamatergic neurotransmission.</jats:p>
Neuroprotective Role of L-NG-Nitroarginine Methyl Ester (L-NAME) against Chronic Hypobaric Hypoxia with Crowding Stress (CHC) Induced Depression-Like Behaviour 1. PLoS One. 2016 Apr 15;11(4):e0153371. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153371. 
eCollection 2016.

Neuroprotective Role of L-NG-Nitroarginine Methyl Ester (L-NAME) against Chronic 
Hypobaric Hypoxia with Crowding Stress (CHC) Induced Depression-Like Behaviour.

Deep SN(1)
 Baitharu I(2), Sharma A(3), Gurjar AK(4), Prasad D(1), Singh SB(1).
Author information:
(1)Neurobiology Division, Defence Institute of Physiology and Allied Sciences, 
Lucknow Road, Timarpur, Delhi- 54, India.
(2)Post Graduate Department of Environmental Sciences, Sambalpur University, 
Sambalpur, Odisha, India.
(3)Department of Pharmacology, Punjab Technical University, Chandigarh, Punjab, 
India.
(4)Bundelkhand University, Jhansi, Uttar Pradesh, India.
Improper neuroimmune responses following chronic stress exposure have been 
reported to cause neuronal dysfunctions leading to memory impairment, anxiety 
and depression like behaviours.
Though several factors affecting microglial 
activation and consequent alteration in neuro-inflammatory responses have been 
well studied, role of NO and its association with microglia in stress induced 
depression model is yet to be explored.
In the present study, we validated 
combination of chronic hypobaric hypoxia and crowding (CHC) as a stress model 
for depression and investigated the role of chronic stress induced elevated 
nitric oxide (NO) level in microglia activation and its effect on 
neuro-inflammatory responses in brain.
Further, we evaluated the ameliorative 
effect of L-NG-Nitroarginine Methyl Ester (L-NAME) to reverse the stress induced 
depressive mood state.
Four groups of male Sprague Dawley rat were taken and 
divided into control and CHC stress exposed group with and without treatment of 
L-NAME.
Depression like behaviour and anhedonia in rats were assessed by Forced 
Swim Test (FST) and Sucrose Preference Test (SPT).
Microglial activation was 
evaluated using Iba-1 immunohistochemistry and proinflammatory cytokines were 
assessed in the hippocampal region.
Our result showed that exposure to CHC 
stress increased the number of active microglia with corresponding increase in 
inflammatory cytokines and altered behavioural responses.
The inhibition of NO 
synthesis by L-NAME during CHC exposure decreased the number of active microglia 
in hippocampus as evident from decreased Iba-1 positive cells.
Further, L-NAME 
administration decreased pro-inflammatory cytokines in hippocampus and improved 
behaviour of rats.
Our study demonstrate that stress induced elevation of NO 
plays pivotal role in altered microglial activation and consequent 
neurodegenerative processes leading to depression like behaviour in rat.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0153371
PMCID: PMC4833384
PMID: 27082990 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
Release of superoxide-dependent relaxing factor(s) from endothelial cells <jats:p> In the present work
 an experimental system was designed to study superoxide anion radical, implicated as the cause of vascular dilatation.
To circumvent its direct effect, we employed a two-bath system.
When the endothelial cells (EC) were exposed to electrical field stimulation (EFS) or to a hypoxanthine-xanthine oxidase system in bath A plus its physiological buffer solution suffused on a helical strip of cat basilar artery in bath B, the contraction to 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) was depressed to approximately 40-50% of the control value.
The reduction was not elicited on EFS in a state of calcium deficiency or in the absence of EC.
The depression could be prevented by pretreatment with superoxide dismutase (SOD), but not with an effective dose of catalase, dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO), mannitol, or indomethacin.
The percent depression of contraction was paralleled by an increase in SOD-inhibitable cytochrome c reduction, which was not associated with cyclic guanosine 3',5'-monophosphate formation.
These results suggest that superoxide-dependent relaxing factor is released from EC differently than the endothelium-derived relaxing factor mediated by acetylcholine.
</jats:p>
[Effect of Tongxinluo superfine on experimental anginal model (contraction of collaterals) in rat with endothelial dysfunction]. 1. Zhongguo Zhong Yao Za Zhi. 2007 Nov;32(22):2404-8
 2426.
[Effect of Tongxinluo superfine on experimental anginal model (contraction of 
collaterals) in rat with endothelial dysfunction].
[Article in Chinese]

Han YL(1), Cheng C, Tan HM, Wu WK, Wu YL, Sun HL, Sun J, Chen JL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pathophysiology, Zhongshan School of Medicine, Guangzhou 
510080, China.
OBJECTIVE: To study the effect of Tongxinluo superfine (TXL) on experimental 
anginal model induced by Arginine Vasopressin in rats with endothelial 
dysfunction.
METHOD: First, the endothelial dysfunction rat model was made by 
methionine-induced hyperhomocysteinemia (HHcy).
The thoracic aorta were excised, 
and acetylcholine (Ach)-induced endothelium dependent relaxation and sodium 
nitroprusside (SNP) induced endothelium-independent relaxation were measured.
Total plasma homocysteine (Hcy) concentrations were measured with automated 
fluorescence polarization immunoassay (FPIA).
Enzyme-linked immunosorbent assay 
(ELISA) was used to detect plasma von Willebrand factor (vWF) level.
Plasma 
nitric oxide (NO) contents were assayed by method of nitrate reductase.
Then, 
the rat model of collaterals contraction (model group) was established by AVP 
intravenous injection in rats with endothelial dysfunction and the S wave change 
(DeltaS) and T wave depression in Lead II ECG were used as the index of angina 
severity.
The nitric oxide (NO) contents in serum and the expression of 
myocardium eNOS mRNA were measured.
RESULT: Ach (0.
1-1000 nmol L(-1))-induced endothelium dependent relaxation 
(EDR) of aortic rings was significantly decreased in HHcy group.
The 
endothelium-independent relaxation induced by SNP (0.001-10 micromol L(-1)) was 
not significantly different between the two groups.
Plasma homocysteine 
concentrations and vWF levels in rats treated with methionine were higher than 
those of control group, while NO contents were significantly decreased in HHcy 
group compared with control.
The results showed that L-methionine intake induced 
hyperhomocysteinemia in rats.
Impaired EDR, increased vWF and decreased NO 
suggested the exist of endothelial dysfunction.
DeltaS of model group increased 
from 1 min to 5 min and T wave of model group depressed at 2 min compared with 
that of control after the administration of vasopressin (0.5 U kg(-1)).
The 
intragastric administration of TXL inhibited vasopressin-induced S wave change 
at 4 min and 5 min and T wave depression from 30 s to 3 min after AVP injection.
The NO contents in serum and the expression of myocardium eNOS mRNA of TXL group 
were increased compared with model group.
CONCLUSION: Experimental angina induced by AVP injection is more severe in rats 
with endothelial dysfunction.
Tongxinluo Superfine can protect against 
collaterals contraction in rats maybe by increasing the NO contents in serum and 
the expression of myocardium eNOS mRNA.
PMID: 18257270 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Urine trans
trans-muconic acid as a biomarker for benzene exposure in gas station attendants in Bangkok, Thailand.
1.
Ann Clin Lab Sci.
2001 Oct;31(4):399-401.
Urine trans,trans-muconic acid as a biomarker for benzene exposure in gas 
station attendants in Bangkok, Thailand.
Wiwanitkit V(1), Suwansaksri J, Nasuan P.

Author information:
(1)Department of Laboratory Medicine, Medical Faculty, Chulalongkorn University, 
Bangkok, Thailand.
viroj.w@chula.ac.th

The toxicity of benzene, a chemical used in many industrial processes, involves 
bone marrow depression and leukemogenesis and is associated with damage to 
multiple classes of hematopoietic cells and hematopoietic functions.
Environmental exposure to benzene causes an increased body burden, which is 
reflected in several biomarkers, eg, urine trans,trans-muconic acid (ttMA).
Associated with the industrialization of Thailand, a developing country in 
Southeast Asia, workers in many occupations have acquired substantial risks of 
benzene exposure.
In this study, benzene exposure was monitored by 
high-performance liquid chromatography (HPLC) of urine ttMA in 79 persons, 
including 49 controls and 30 gas station attendants.
In controls, urine ttMA 
concentration averaged 0.12 (SD +/- 0.03) mg/g creatinine; in gas station 
attendants, urine ttMA concentration averaged 4.00 (SD +/- 12.49) mg/g 
creatinine (p < 0.05).
Based on these findings, wider use of urine ttMA 
determination is recommended as a biomarker for occupational exposure to 
benzene.
PMID: 11688852 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Further elucidation of a pertussis toxin-sensitive transmembrane signaling mechanism involved in central α2-adrenoceptor activation in the rat 1. J Biomed Sci. 1994 Dec;1(1):13-18. doi: 10.1007/BF02258335.

Further Elucidation of a Pertussis Toxin-Sensitive Transmembrane Signaling 
Mechanism Involved in Central alpha(2)-Adrenoceptor Activation in the Rat.

Chen CH(1)
 Lin KS, Chan SH.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Pharmacology, National Yang-Ming Medical College, Taipei, 
Taiwan, ROC.
In adult male Sprague-Dawley rats anesthetized with pentobarbital sodium, we 
elucidated the molecular consequence of central alpha(2)-adrenoceptor 
activation.
The hypotensive and negative chronotropic and inotropic actions of 
the alpha(2)-adrenoceptor agonist guanabenz were used as our experimental index.
Intracerebroventricular administration of pertussis toxin (2.5 &mgr;g) 
significantly attenuated the cardiovascular suppressant effects of the 
aminoguanidine compound (100 &mgr;g/kg i.v.).
However, application of 
N-ethylmaleimide (0.125 or 0.250 &mgr;g), phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (1.25 
or 2.50 &mgr;g), cholera toxin (1.25 or 2.50 &mgr;g) or forskolin (12.5 or 25.0 
&mgr;g) into the lateral cerebral ventricle elicited no appreciable blunting 
effect on the circulatory depression produced by guanabenz.
These results were 
essentially duplicated when pertussis toxin (0.125 or 0.250 &mgr;g), 
N-ethylmaleimide (0.0125 or 0.05 &mgr;g), phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate (0.125 
or 0.25 &mgr;g), cholera toxin (0.125 or 0.25 &mgr;g) or forskolin (1.25 or 2.50 
&mgr;g) was microinjected bilaterally to the nucleus reticularis 
gigantocellularis, a medullary site believed to be intimately related to the 
antihypertensive action of guanabenz.
These findings suggest that stimulation of 
the alpha(2)-adrenoceptors in the medulla oblongata may result in the activation 
of a pertussis toxin-sensitive GTP-binding regulatory protein.
They further 
suggest that the biologic signals subsequent to this action may not be linked to 
Gs, Gi or Gp but possibly Go.
Copyright 1994 S. Karger AG, Basel

DOI: 10.1007/BF02258335
PMID: 11725002
Effect of ethanol on the excitability of the inferior olive in decerebrate ferret. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1996 May;277(2):761-7.

Effect of ethanol on the excitability of the inferior olive in decerebrate 
ferret.

Svensson P(1)
 Hesslow G, Winton R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Neuroscience, Lund University, Sweden.
Climbing fibers, which originate in the inferior olive and project to Purkinje 
cells and Golgi cells in the cerebral cortex, were activated at low (0.4-Hz) and 
high (4-Hz) frequencies by periorbital stimulation in decerebrate ferrets.
Climbing fiber responses were recorded as field potentials from the c3 zone of 
the cerebellar surface.
When periorbital stimulation was applied at high 
frequency, the climbing fiber responses became strongly depressed within a few 
seconds.
It has previously been shown that this high frequency depression (HFD) 
of climbing fiber responses is due to a cerebellar inhibition of the inferior 
olive, probably via the nucleo-olivary pathway.
Acute administration of ethanol 
had small and variable effects on the amplitude of climbing fiber responses 
evoked by low-frequency stimulation.
In contrast, medium concentrations 
(0.44-2.90 g/l) of ethanol led to a marked reduction of the HFD.
Low ( < 0.44 
g/l) systemic concentrations had no measurable effects on the HFD, whereas high 
concentrations ( > 2.90 g/l) caused either an increased HFD or a nonseptic 
reduction in olivary excitability.
Because HFD has previously been shown to 
involve cerebello-olivary inhibition, the possibility of an interaction between 
ethanol and GABA-ergic responses in the interposito-olivary pathway is 
discussed.
PMID: 8627556 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
β-Asarone Reverses Chronic Unpredictable Mild  Stress-Induced Depression-Like Behavior and Promotes Hippocampal Neurogenesis in Rats <jats:p>In this study
 we investigated the influence of β-asarone, the major ingredient of Acorus tatarinowii Schott, on depressive-like behavior induced by the chronic unpredictable mild stresses (CUMS) paradigm and to clarify the underlying mechanisms.
The results show that β-asarone treatment partially reversed the CUMS-induced depression-like behaviors in both the forced swim and sucrose preference tests.
The behavioral effects were associated with increased hippocampal neurogenesis indicated by bromodeoxyuridine (BrdU) immunoreactivity.
β-Asarone treatment significantly increased the expression of brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) at levels of transcription and translation.
Moreover, CUMS caused significant reduction in ERK1/2 and CREB phosphorylation, both of which were partially attenuated by β-asarone administration.
It is important to note that β-asarone treatment had no effect on total levels or phosphorylation state of any of the proteins examined in ERK1/2-CREB pathway in no stress rats, suggesting that β-asarone acts in a stress-dependent manner to block ERK1/2-CREB signaling.
We did not observe a complete reversal of depression-like behaviors to control levels by β-asarone.
To our knowledge, the present study is the first to demonstrate that adult neurogenesis is involved in the antidepressant-like behavioral effects of β-asarone, suggesting that β-asarone is a promising candidate for the treatment of depression.</jats:p>
Altered adrenal steroidogenesis in "low renin" essential hypertension. 1. Trans Assoc Am Physicians. 1974;87:248-57.

Altered adrenal steroidogenesis in "low renin" essential hypertension.

Dale SL
 Melby JC.
PMID: 4456734 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Environmental influences upon drug-induced suppression of operant behavior. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1971 Oct;179(1):1-9.

Environmental influences upon drug-induced suppression of operant behavior.

Sparber SB
 Tilson HA.
PMID: 5096565 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Oxytocin as a possible mediator of SSRI-induced antidepressant effects 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1999 Feb;142(1):95-101. doi: 10.1007/s002130050867.

Oxytocin as a possible mediator of SSRI-induced antidepressant effects.

Uvnäs-Moberg K(1)
 Bjökstrand E, Hillegaart V, Ahlenius S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, Karolinska Institute, Stockholm, 
Sweden.
The nonapeptide oxytocin is released into systemic circulation in situations of 
psychosocial interaction, and has been shown to be involved in mechanisms of 
social bonding and social recognition in laboratory studies.
In view of 
disturbances in psychosocial relationships being a triggering factor for 
depression and anxiety, it is interesting to note that experimental studies have 
shown oxytocin to possess antidepressant- and anxiolytic-like actions.
Thus.
in 
the present study we examined effects of the SSRI citalopram (20 mg/kg i.p.)
on 
plasma oxytocin, acutely and upon repeated administration, in adult male 
Sprague-Dawley rats.
Plasma oxytocin, and some functionally related peptides 
(CCK, gastrin, somatostatin and insulin), were measured by standard 
radioimmunoassay techniques.
Acute citalopram administration produced a 
statistically significant increase in plasma oxytocin and CCK levels.
Administration of citalopram for 14 days did not attenuate the 
oxytocin-releasing effect to a challenge dose of the SSRI zimeldine (20 mg/kg 
s.c.), whereas CCK levels were not increased after the subchronic citalopram 
treatment.
Thus, the SSRI citalopram produces increased plasma oxytocin levels 
acutely, and there appears to be no or little tolerance to this effect upon 
repeated administration.
There were no, or variable, effects on plasma levels of 
gastrin, somatostatin or insulin.
It is suggested that oxytocin release is an 
important aspect of the pharmacological actions of SSRIs, and this could be an 
important contributory factor for the clinical profile of this group of 
antidepressants with particular efficacy in disorders of psychosocial origin.
DOI: 10.1007/s002130050867
PMID: 10102788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of acute or daily cocaine administration on cellular immune response and virus infection in mice. 1. Nat Immun Cell Growth Regul. 1990;9(6):397-405.

Effect of acute or daily cocaine administration on cellular immune response and 
virus infection in mice.

Di Francesco P(1)
 Pica F, Croce C, Favalli C, Tubaro E, Garaci E.

Author information:
(1)Department of Experimental Medicine, 2nd University of Rome, Tor Vergata, 
Italy.
The effects of in vivo cocaine administrations on cellular cytotoxicity were 
studied.
Cocaine induced a dose-related immunosuppression of natural killer cell 
activity, with maximal depression at 1-5 mg/kg.
In addition, the degree of 
inhibition following a single intraperitoneal (i.p.)
or intravenous cocaine dose 
(acute treatment, 1 mg/kg) was similar to that after repeated administration 
(subchronic treatment: 1 mg/kg/day i.p.
for 7 consecutive days or subcutaneous 
administration by Alzet 2001 osmotic minipumps).
T cells from cocaine-treated 
mice failed to generate cytotoxic T lymphocytes (CTL) in mixed lymphocyte 
cultures and acute or subchronic cocaine treatment also inhibited CTL generation 
in vivo.
On the other hand, acute administration induced a very rapid (24-hour) 
inhibition of natural cytotoxicity, with a return to normal within 72 h after 
treatment.
By contrast, repeated doses led to more protracted immunologic 
consequences and a delayed recovery (144 h).
The effect of cocaine on 
susceptibility to influenza virus (PR8) infection was also investigated.
Both 
acute and subchronic treatment significantly decreased resistance to PR8 
infection.
The results clearly indicate that cocaine has a potent suppressive 
effect on cellular immunity and that abuse can adversely affect the outcome of 
infectious diseases.
PMID: 1965012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The fluxes of CO2 from grazed and fenced temperate steppe during two drought years on the Inner Mongolia Plateau
 China 1.
Sci Total Environ.
2011 Dec 1;410-411:182-90. doi: 
10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.09.067.
Epub 2011 Oct 24.
The fluxes of CO2 from grazed and fenced temperate steppe during two drought 
years on the Inner Mongolia Plateau, China.
Wang YF(1), Cui XY, Hao YB, Mei XR, Yu GR, Huang XZ, Kang XM, Zhou XQ.
Author information:
(1)College of Life Sciences, Graduate University of Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Beijing, 100049, China.
The CO(2) flux was measured by the eddy covariance method on a temperate Leymus 
chinensis steppe over a period of 17 months spanning two consecutive growing 
seasons.
The amount of precipitation was nearly normal, but it was low in the 
early and high in the late growing period in 2006.
In the 2007 growing season, 
the amount of precipitation was about 45% less than the multi-year average and 
more evenly distributed.
Comparisons were made between a moderately grazed site 
and a 28-year-old fenced site.
The maximum instantaneous CO(2) release and 
uptake rates were 0.12 (May) and -0.11mg CO(2)m(-2)s(-1) (July) at the fenced 
site, and 0.11 and -0.16mg CO(2)m(-2)s(-1) (both in July) at the grazed site.
In 
both growing seasons, the grazed site always had a higher daily uptake rate or 
lower release rate than the fenced site.
The grazed site was a CO(2) sink during 
the growing season of 2007 and a CO(2) source in the growing season of 2006, 
whereas the fenced site was a CO(2) source in both seasons.
Lower precipitation 
decreased CO(2) loss during the growing season more in the grazed site than in 
the fenced site, mainly because of depression of total ecosystem respiration 
(R(e)) in the former and stimulation in the latter.
During the dormant season 
(from October to April), the fenced and grazed sites released 60.0 and 32.4g of 
C per m(2), respectively.
Path analysis showed that temperature had the greatest 
effect on daily variation of ecosystem CO(2) exchange during the growing seasons 
at the two study sites.
The results suggest that decrease of precipitation 
and/or increase of temperature will likely promote C loss from L. chinensis 
steppes, whether fenced or grazed, and that a grazed site is more sensitive.
Copyright Â© 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.scitotenv.2011.09.067
PMID: 22024234 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Synergistic antidepressant-like effect of the joint administration of caffeine and NMDA receptor ligands in the forced swim test in mice 1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2016 Apr;123(4):463-72. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-015-1467-4. Epub 2015 Oct 28.

Synergistic antidepressant-like effect of the joint administration of caffeine 
and NMDA receptor ligands in the forced swim test in mice.

Serefko A(1)
 Szopa A(1), Wlaź A(2), Wośko S(1), Wlaź P(3), Poleszak E(4).
Author information:
(1)Chair and Department of Applied Pharmacy, Medical University of Lublin, 
Chodźki 1, 20-093, Lublin, Poland.
(2)Department of Pathophysiology, Medical University of Lublin, Lublin, Poland.
(3)Department of Animal Physiology, Institute of Biology and Biochemistry, Maria 
Curie-Skłodowska University, Lublin, Poland.
(4)Chair and Department of Applied Pharmacy, Medical University of Lublin, 
Chodźki 1, 20-093, Lublin, Poland.
ewa.poleszak@umlub.pl.
The optimal treatment of depressed patients remains one of the most important 
challenges concerning depression.
The identification of the best treatment 
strategies and development of new, safer, and more effective agents are crucial.
The glutamatergic system seems to be a promising drug target, and consequently 
the use of the NMDA receptor ligands, particularly in co-administration with 
other substances exerting the antidepressant activity, has emerged among the new 
ideas.
The objective of this study was to examine the effect of caffeine on the 
performance of mice treated with various NMDA modulators in the forced swim 
test.
We demonstrated a significant interaction between caffeine (5 mg/kg) and 
the following NMDA receptor ligands: MK-801 (an antagonist binding in the ion 
channel, 0.05 mg/kg), CGP 37849 (an antagonist of the glutamate site, 0.312 
mg/kg), L-701,324 (an antagonist of the glycine site, 1 mg/kg), and 
D-cycloserine (a high-efficacy partial agonist of the glycine site, 2.5 mg/kg), 
while the interaction between caffeine and the inorganic modulators, i.e., 
Zn(2+) (2.5 mg/kg) and Mg(2+) (10 mg/kg), was not considered as significant.
Based on the obtained results, the simultaneous blockage of the adenosine and 
NMDA receptors may be a promising target in the development of new 
antidepressants.
DOI: 10.1007/s00702-015-1467-4
PMCID: PMC4805709
PMID: 26510772 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Endogenous nitric oxide release required for long-term synaptic depression in the cerebellum 1. Nature. 1991 Jan 24;349(6307):326-8. doi: 10.1038/349326a0.

Endogenous nitric oxide release required for long-term synaptic depression in 
the cerebellum.

Shibuki K(1)
 Okada D.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory for Neural Networks, Frontier Research Program, RIKEN, Saitama, 
Japan.
Conjunctive stimulation of climbing and parallel fibres in the cerebellum evokes 
a long-term depression of parallel-fibre Purkinje-cell transmission, a 
phenomenon implicated as the cellular mechanism for cerebellar motor learning.
It is suspected that the increase in cyclic GMP concentration that occurs after 
activation of climbing fibres is required to evoke long-term depression.
Excitatory amino acids are known to cause the release of nitric oxide (NO), 
resulting in elevation of the cGMP level in the cerebellum.
Here we report that 
endogenous NO is released after stimulation of climbing fibres, that long-term 
depression evoked by conjunctive stimulation of parallel and climbing fibres is 
blocked by haemoglobin (which strongly binds NO) or L-NG-monomethyl-arginine (an 
inhibitor of NO synthase), and that exogenous NO or cGMP can substitute for the 
stimulation of climbing fibres to cause long-term depression in rat cerebellar 
slices.
These results demonstrate that the release of endogenous NO is essential 
for the induction of synaptic plasticity in the cerebellum.
DOI: 10.1038/349326a0
PMID: 1702879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of maternal ethanol consumption on foetal and neonatal rat hepatic protein synthesis <jats:p>Effects of maternal ethanol consumption were investigated on the rates of protein synthehsis by livers of foetal and neonatal rats both in vivo and in vitro
 and on the activities of enzymes involved in protein synthesis and degradation.
The rates of general protein synthesis by ribosomes in vitro studied by measuring the incorporation of [14C]leucine into ribosomal protein showed that maternal ethanol consumption resulted in an inhibition of the rates of protein synthesis by both foetal and neonatal livers from the ethanol-fed group.
The rates of incorporation of intravenously injected [14C]leucine into hepatic proteins were also significantly lower in the foetal, neonatal and adult livers from the ethanol-fed group.
Incubation of adult-rat liver slices with ethanol resulted in an inhibition of the incorporation of [14C]leucine into hepatic proteins; however, this effect was not observed in the foetal liver slices.
This effect of externally added ethanol was at least partially prevented by the addition of pyrazole to the adult liver slices.
Pyrazole addition to foetal liver slices was without significant effect on the rates of protein synthesis.
Cross-mixing experiments showed that the capacity of both hepatic ribosomes and pH5 enzyme fractions to synthesize proteins was decreased in the foetal liver from the ethanol-fed group.
Maternal ethanol consumption resulted in a decrease in hepatic total RNA content, RNA/DNA ratio and ribosomal protein content in the foetal liver.
Foetal hepatic DNA content was not significantly affected.
Ethanol consumption resulted in a significant decrease in proteolytic activity and the activity of tryptophan oxygenase in the foetal, neonatal and adult livers.
It is possible that the mechanisms of inhibition of protein synthesis observed here in the foetal liver after maternal ethanol consumption may be responsible for at least some of the changes observed in ‘foetal alcohol syndrome’.</jats:p>
Oxytocin plasma concentrations in children and adolescents with autism spectrum disorder: correlation with autistic symptomatology 1. Atten Defic Hyperact Disord. 2014 Sep;6(3):231-9. doi: 
10.1007/s12402-014-0145-y. Epub 2014 Jul 3.

Oxytocin plasma concentrations in children and adolescents with autism spectrum 
disorder: correlation with autistic symptomatology.

Taurines R(1)
 Schwenck C, Lyttwin B, Schecklmann M, Jans T, Reefschläger L, 
Geissler J, Gerlach M, Romanos M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, University 
of Würzburg, Füchsleinstraße 15, 97080, Würzburg, Germany, Taurines_R@ukw.de.
Findings from research in animal models and humans have shown a clear role for 
the neuropeptide oxytocin (OT) on complex social behaviors.
This is also true in 
the context of autism spectrum disorder (ASD).
Previous studies on peripheral OT 
concentrations in children and young adults have reported conflicting results 
with the initial studies presenting mainly decreased OT plasma levels in ASD 
compared to healthy controls.
Our study therefore aimed to further investigate 
changes in peripheral OT concentrations as a potential surrogate for the effects 
observed in the central nervous system (CNS) in ASD.
OT plasma concentrations 
were assessed in 19 male children and adolescents with ASD, all with an IQ > 70 
(age 10.7 ± 3.8 years), 17 healthy male children (age 13.6 ± 2.1 years) and 19 
young male patients with attention deficit hyperactivity disorder (ADHD) as a 
clinical control group (age 10.4 ± 1.9 years) using a validated 
radioimmunoassay.
Analysis of covariance revealed significant group differences 
in OT plasma concentrations (F(2, 48) = 9.574, p < 0.001, η2 = 0.285; plasma 
concentrations ASD 19.61 ± 7.12 pg/ml, ADHD 8.05 ± 5.49 pg/ml, healthy controls 
14.43 ± 9.64 pg/ml).
Post hoc analyses showed significantly higher 
concentrations in children with ASD compared to ADHD (p < 0.001).
After 
Bonferroni correction, there was no significant difference in ASD in comparison 
with healthy controls (p = 0.132).
A significant strong correlation between 
plasma OT and autistic symptomatology, assessed by the Autism Diagnostic 
Observation Schedule, was observed in the ASD group (p = 0.013, r = 0.603).
Patients with ADHD differed from healthy control children by significantly 
decreased OT concentrations (p = 0.014).
No significant influences of the 
covariates age, IQ, medication and comorbidity could be seen.
Our preliminary 
results point to a correlation of OT plasma concentrations with autistic symptom 
load in children with ASD and a modulation of the OT system also in the 
etiologically and phenotypically overlapping disorder ADHD.
Further studies in 
humans and animal models are warranted to clarify the complex association of the 
OT system with social impairments as well as stress-related and depressive 
behavior and whether peripheral findings reflect primary changes of OT synthesis 
and/or release in relevant areas of the CNS.
DOI: 10.1007/s12402-014-0145-y
PMID: 24989441 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Clinical staging: a necessary step in the development of improved animal models of mood disturbance? 1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2014 Mar;17(3):491-5. doi: 
10.1017/S1461145713001107. Epub 2013 Oct 16.

Clinical staging: a necessary step in the development of improved animal models 
of mood disturbance?

Walker FR(1)
 James MH(1), Hickie IB(2), McGorry PD(3).
Author information:
(1)School of Biomedical Sciences and Pharmacy, University of Newcastle, 
Callaghan, NSW, Australia.
(2)Brain and Mind Research Institute, The University of Sydney, Camperdown, NSW, 
Australia.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, ORYGEN Youth Health Research Centre, University of 
Melbourne, VIC, Australia.
Recently, it has been suggested that the clinical staging approach be considered 
a serious alternative framework for conceptualising mood related 
psychopathology.
The fundamental difference between clinical staging and the now 
dominant categorical diagnostic framework is that the entire illness trajectory 
becomes relevant, as opposed to simply the end-stage.
The concept of disease 
trajectory has significant implications for animal models of psychopathology, 
and particularly for animal models of depression.
This article will introduce 
and discuss the implications of the clinical staging approach for those 
undertaking research using animal models of mood disturbance.
DOI: 10.1017/S1461145713001107
PMID: 24128407 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein 2/poly-lactide-co-glycolic acid (rhBMP-2/PLGA) with core decompression on repair of rabbit femoral head necrosis 1. Asian Pac J Trop Med. 2014 Nov;7(11):895-9. doi:
10.1016/S1995-7645(14)60156-5.  Epub 2014 Oct 22.

Effect of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein 
2/poly-lactide-co-glycolic acid (rhBMP-2/PLGA) with core decompression on repair 
of rabbit femoral head necrosis.

Pan ZX(1)
 Zhang HX(2), Wang YX(2), Zhai LD(2), Du W(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Joint Surgery, No 89 Hospital of People's Liberation Army, 
Weifang 261021, China.
Electronic address: guke89@126.com.
(2)Department of Joint Surgery, No 89 Hospital of People's Liberation Army, 
Weifang 261021, China.
OBJECTIVE: To observe the effect of recombinant human bone morphogenetic protein 
2/poly-lactide-co-glycolic acid (rhBMP-2/PLGA) with core decompression on repair 
of rabbit femoral head necrosis.
METHOD: Bilateral femoral head necrosis models of rabbit were established by 
steroid injection.
A total of 48 rabbits (96 femoral head necrosis) were 
randomly divided into 4 groups: Group A, control group with12 rabbits, 24 
femoral head necrosis; Group B, treated with rhBMP-2/PLGA implantation after 
core depression, with 12 rabbits, 24 femoral head necrosis; Group C, treated 
with rhBMP-2 implantation after core depression, with 12 rabbits, 24 femoral 
head necrosis; Group D treated with core depression group without implantation, 
with 12 rabbits, 24 femoral head necrosis.
All animals were sacrificed after 12 
weeks.
The ability of repairing bone defect was evaluated by X-ray radiograph.
Bone mineral density analysis of the defect regions were used to evaluate the 
level of ossification.
The morphologic change and bone formation was assessed by 
HE staining.
The angiogenesis was evaluated by VEGF immunohistochemistry.
RESULTS: The osteogenetic ability and quality of femoral head necrosis in group 
B were better than those of other groups after 12 weeks by X-ray radiograph and 
morphologic investigation.
And the angiogenesis in group B was better than other 
groups.
Group C had similar osteogenetic quality of femoral head necrosis and 
angiogenesis with group D.
CONCLUSION: The treatment of rhBMP-2/PLGA implantation after core depression can 
promote the repair of rabbit femoral head necrosis.
It is a promising and 
efficient synthetic bone material to treat the femoral head necrosis.
Copyright © 2014 Hainan Medical College.
Published by Elsevier B.V. All rights 
reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/S1995-7645(14)60156-5
PMID: 25441990
The Mechanism of Hypotension Following Angiography 1. Invest Radiol. 1976 SEP-OCT;11(5):472-8. doi:
10.1097/00004424-197609000-00153.

The mechanism of hypotension following angiography.

Chahine RA
 Raizner AE.
The hypotension observed following the intracardiac injection of contrast media 
is believed to be the result of myocardial depression, peripheral 
vasodilatation, or both.
It is unclear which of these factors is primarily 
involved in different types of angiography.
To assess this problem, 
Renografin-76 was injected into the aortic root of 15 anesthetized dogs (1 
ml/kg) and into the left coronary artery (3-5 ml) in 18 dogs.
The heart rate, 
the systolic and diastolic arterial pressures, left ventricular pressure, peak 
dp/dt and dp/dt-40 were monitored continuously until return to baseline.
Following selective left coronary artery injection, both systolic and diastolic 
pressures decreased maximally at 5 seconds with parallel changes in peak dp/dt 
and dp/dt-40.
Following the aortic root injection, the blood pressure response 
was biphasic, increasing at 5 seconds and decreasing maximally at 20 seconds.
The corresponding changes in peak dp/dt and dp/dt-40 were initial depression at 
5 seconds with quick return to baseline and increase above control at the time 
of maximal hypotension.
The left ventricular end diastolic pressure rose 
maximally at 5 to 10 seconds for both coronary and aortic injections.
The 
mechanism of hypotension, therefore, varies with the type of angiography.
Myocardial depression appears to be a primary factor with selective coronary 
angiography.
However, with aortic root injection, myocardial contractility, 
although initially depressed, is already improved at the time of maximal 
hypotension, and thus peripheral vasocilatation is probably the prime mechanism 
of the hypotension.
DOI: 10.1097/00004424-197609000-00153
PMID: 977264 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Beneficial effects of treatment with sensory isolation in flotation-tank as a preventive health-care intervention – a randomized controlled pilot trial 1. BMC Complement Altern Med. 2014 Oct 25;14:417. doi: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-417.

Beneficial effects of treatment with sensory isolation in flotation-tank as a 
preventive health-care intervention - a randomized controlled pilot trial.

Kjellgren A(1)
 Westman J.
Author information:
(1)Human Performance Laboratory, Karlstad University, Karlstad, Sweden.
Anette.Kjellgren@kau.se.
BACKGROUND: Sensory isolation in a flotation tank is a method known for inducing 
deep relaxation and subsequent positive health effects for patients suffering 
from e.g.
stress or muscle tensions pains.
Very few studies have investigated 
this method as a preventive health-care intervention.
The purpose of this study 
was to evaluate the effects in healthy participants after receiving a series of 
flotation tank treatment.
METHODS: Sixty-five participants (14 men and 51 women) who were all part of a 
cooperative-health project initiated by their individual companies, were 
randomized to either a wait-list control group or a flotation tank treatment 
group where they participated in a seven weeks flotation program with a total of 
twelve flotation sessions.
Questionnaires measuring psychological and 
physiological variables such as stress and energy, depression and anxiety, 
optimism, pain, stress, sleep quality, mindfulness, and degree of altered states 
of consciousness were used.
Data were analysed by two-way mixed MANOVA and 
repeated measures ANOVA.
RESULTS: Stress, depression, anxiety, and worst pain were significantly 
decreased whereas optimism and sleep quality significantly increased for the 
flotation-REST group.
No significant results for the control group were seen.
There was also a significant correlation between mindfulness in daily life and 
degree of altered states of consciousness during the relaxation in the flotation 
tank.
CONCLUSIONS: It was concluded that flotation-REST has beneficial effects on 
relatively healthy participants.
TRIAL REGISTRATION: Australian New Zealand Clinical Trials Registry: 
ACTRN12613000483752.
DOI: 10.1186/1472-6882-14-417
PMCID: PMC4219027
PMID: 25344737 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Involvement of glutathione
 ERK1/2 phosphorylation and BDNF expression in the antidepressant-like effect of zinc in rats 1.
Behav Brain Res.
2008 Apr 9;188(2):316-23. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2007.11.012.
Epub  2007 Nov 22.
Involvement of glutathione, ERK1/2 phosphorylation and BDNF expression in the 
antidepressant-like effect of zinc in rats.
Franco JL(1), Posser T, Brocardo PS, Trevisan R, Uliano-Silva M, Gabilan NH, 
Santos AR, Leal RB, Rodrigues AL, Farina M, Dafre AL.
Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciências Fisiológicas, Centro de Ciências Biológicas, 
Universidade Federal de Santa Catarina, Florianópolis, SC, Brazil.
We investigated the antidepressant-like effect of zinc chloride (zinc) 
administered acutely during 7 days (i.p.
route), or chronically during 30 days 
(oral route) in the forced swimming test (FST) in rats.
It was also investigated 
whether the antidepressant-like effect of zinc is associated with changes in the 
glutathione antioxidant system in the Wistar rat brain.
Animals receiving a 
single zinc dose (5, 15 and 30 mg/kg, i.p.)
24 h prior to analysis showed no 
changes in the FST, but glutathione reductase and glutathione S-transferase 
activity were reduced in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex.
This treatment did 
not, however, affect the glutathione status (GSH and GSSG) in both brain 
structures.
The 7-day zinc treatment (1, 5 and 15 mg/kg, i.p.)
caused a mild 
though significant antidepressant-like effect in the FST at the highest dosing, 
without affecting the glutathione antioxidant system.
Finally, a consistent 
antidepressant-like effect was achieved in the FST after chronic (30 days) zinc 
treatment (300 mg/L, p.o.).
This was accompanied by a significant increase in 
total glutathione levels in the hippocampus and cerebral cortex.
The good 
response to oral treatment in the FST led us to investigate other variables, 
such as ERK phosphorylation and BDNF expression.
Similar to therapeutic 
antidepressants, zinc in chronic oral treatment produced an increase in ERK 
phosphorylation and BDNF expression in the cerebral cortex.
It is our hypothesis 
that up-regulation of neuroprotective effectors (GSH, ERK and BDNF) may be 
related to the antidepressant properties of zinc, but this will require 
additional work to be confirmed.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2007.11.012
PMID: 18191237 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of prefrontal cortical calcium independent phospholipase A2 in antidepressant-like effect of maprotiline 1. Int J Neuropsychopharmacol. 2012 Sep;15(8):1087-98. doi: 
10.1017/S1461145711001234. Epub 2011 Aug 11.

Role of prefrontal cortical calcium independent phospholipase A₂ in 
antidepressant-like effect of maprotiline.

Lee LH(1)
 Tan CH, Shui G, Wenk MR, Ong WY.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, National University of Singapore, Singapore.
There is increasing interest in the pathophysiology and neurochemistry of the 
prefrontal cortex (PFC) in depression.
Blood flow and metabolism are decreased 
in the PFC of patients with depression compared to controls.
Changes in 
long-chain polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFAs) are also associated with 
depression.
This study was conducted to elucidate a possible role of PFC 
activity of an enzyme involved in the release of docosahexaenoic acid (DHA), 
i.e.
calcium-independent phospholipase A2 (iPLA₂), in the effects of the 
norepinephrine reuptake inhibitor (NRI) antidepressant, maprotiline, in mice.
Treatment of Balb/C mice with maprotiline for 4 wk resulted in reduction in the 
level of behavioural despair, as determined by decreased immobility and 
increased climbing during the forced swim test.
In contrast, mice treated with 
maprotiline plus bilateral prefrontal cortical injections of antisense 
oligonucleotide to iPLA₂, showed significantly increased immobility and 
decreased climbing, to levels comparable to saline-treated controls, indicating 
abolishment of the antidepressant-like effect of maprotiline.
Lipidomic analyses 
showed significant decreases in phosphatidylcholine species containing 
long-chain PUFAs and increases in lysophosphatidylcholine after maprotiline 
treatment, indicating increased PLA₂ activity and endogenous release of 
eicosapentaenoic acid (EPA) or DHA after maprotiline treatment.
These changes in 
lipid profiles were absent in mice that received maprotiline and PFC injections 
of antisense oligonucleotide to iPLA₂.
Together, the results indicate that PFC 
iPLA₂ activity plays an important role in the antidepressant-like effect of 
maprotiline, possibly through endogenous release of long-chain PUFAs.
DOI: 10.1017/S1461145711001234
PMID: 21835087 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Correlations and Discrepancies between Serum and Brain Tissue Levels of Neurotrophins after Electroconvulsive Treatment in Rats 1. Pharmacopsychiatry. 2009 Nov;42(6):270-6. doi: 10.1055/s-0029-1224162. Epub
2009  Nov 18.

Correlations and discrepancies between serum and brain tissue levels of 
neurotrophins after electroconvulsive treatment in rats.

Sartorius A(1)
 Hellweg R, Litzke J, Vogt M, Dormann C, Vollmayr B, Danker-Hopfe 
H, Gass P.

Author information:
(1)Central Institute of Mental Health, Department of Psychiatry and 
Psychotherapy, Mannheim, Germany.
alexander.sartorius@zi-mannheim.de

INTRODUCTION: The neurotrophin brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) and 
nerve growth factor (NGF) are a central part of the molecular concepts on 
neuroplastic changes associated with stress, anxiety and depression.
An 
increasing number of studies uses serum BDNF levels as a potential indicator for 
central nervous system alterations.
METHODS: To analyze the relationship between brain tissue and serum BDNF and NGF 
levels, we used electroconvulsive shocks (ECS), an animal model of 
electroconvulsive therapy, and studied the temporal profile of neurotrophin 
expression in the hippocampus, prefrontal cortex and serum.
88 male 
Sprague-Dawley rats received single or serial ECS treatments and were killed 
between 3 hours and 14 days after the last treatment.
RESULTS: We found a 2.8-fold rise for BDNF (1.3-fold for NGF) in the prefrontal 
cortex, and a 2.2-fold rise (1.2-fold for NGF) in the hippocampus after 5 ECS 
sessions.
The temporal expression profile and correlation analyses between 
tissue and serum BDNF indicate that BDNF crosses the blood-brain barrier.
No 
such correlation was found for NGF.
DISCUSSION: The time course of central and peripheral BDNF changes may 
significantly differ.
However, we demonstrate substantial evidence that it can 
be justified to measure serum BDNF levels with a time delay to monitor brain 
tissue neurotrophin alterations.
Copyright Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart New York.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0029-1224162
PMID: 19924587 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Desoxyribonucleic Acid and Pyrimidine Synthesis in the Rat during Intra-Uterine Growth Retardation: Responsiveness of Several Organs <jats:p>The response of DNA synthesis
 thymidine incorporation and the activities of uridine kinase, carbamyl phosphate synthetase and aspartate transcarbamylase were studied in the rat, following intra-uterine growth retardation.
A good correlation was found between the falls of DNA production and thymidine incorporation and the decrease of the activity of the three enzymes during the fetal period.
After birth, cell proliferation remained depressed but no further changes occurred in the enzymatic activities.</jats:p>
Effect of leaf essential oil from Piper solmsianum C.DC. in mice behaviour <jats:p>The essential oil from Piper solmsianum leaves and its major compound (sarisan) were tested to verify their influences upon mice behaviour. The essential oil was obtained by hydrodistillation in a modified Clevenger extractor and analysed by GC/ MS. This analysis revealed in the oil the presence of monoterpenes
 sesquiterpenes and of arylpropanoids.
The compound sarisan, a myristicin analogue, was isolated from the oil to perform the pharmacological tests.
Emulsions of the oil and of sarisan (5.0 and 10.0% v/v) were used in the tests.
Pentobarbital (30 mg/ kg s.c.) or diazepam (2.5 mg/ kg s.c.) were tested as standard drugs to verify depressant or anxiolytic effects, respectively.
Both essential oil and sarisan showed to have exciting and depressant effects in the tested animals.</jats:p>
Some cardiovascular effects of crude scorpion venom. 1. Indian J Med Res. 1978 Sep;68:515-8.

Some cardiovascular effects of crude scorpion venom.

Choudhury L
 Ganguly DK.
PMID: 744641 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Fast and Slow Calcium Buffers on Induced Secretion of Neurotransmitter 1. Bull Exp Biol Med. 2010 Sep;149(3):276-9. doi: 10.1007/s10517-010-0926-z.

Effect of fast and slow calcium buffers on induced secretion of 
neurotransmitter.

Skiteva OI(1)
 Lapteva VI, Balezina OP.
Author information:
(1)Department of Human and Animal Physiology, Biological Faculty, M. V. 
Lomonosov Moscow State University, Russia.
oskiteva@gmail.com

Loading of mouse motor nerve terminals with EGTA-AM, but not with BAPTA-AM, 
inhibited the release of the neurotransmitter in response to stimulation of the 
nerve with rare (0.3 Hz) "single" pulses.
During rhythmic stimulation with short 
(50 EPP) high-frequency (20 Hz) series, BAPTA-AM buffer modified burst pattern 
in a dose-dependent manner: it replaced the phase of initial facilitation by 
persistent depression of secretion and decreased its plateau level at the end of 
the burst.
In contrast, loading of the nerve terminals with EGTA-AM buffer 
produced no effect on the phase of initial facilitation, but decreased the 
plateau level to the same degree as BAPTA-AM did.
Probably, the different 
effects of both buffers on secretion of neurotransmitter reflect peculiarities 
of involvement of fast and slow Ca(2+)signals of motor terminals in single and 
rhythmic release of the neurotransmitter.
DOI: 10.1007/s10517-010-0926-z
PMID: 21246081 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
NMDA receptor-mediated activation of medullary pro-nociceptive neurons is required for secondary thermal hyperalgesia 1. Pain. 2007 Feb;127(3):253-262. doi: 10.1016/j.pain.2006.08.020. Epub 2006 Sep 
25.

NMDA receptor-mediated activation of medullary pro-nociceptive neurons is 
required for secondary thermal hyperalgesia.

Xu M(1)
 Kim CJ, Neubert MJ, Heinricher MM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurological Surgery, Oregon Health & Science University, 
Portland, OR 97239, USA Department of Anesthesiology, College of Medicine, 
Catholic University, St. Paul's Hospital, Seoul, South Korea.
There is now direct evidence that a class of neurons in the rostral ventromedial 
medulla (RVM) exerts a net facilitatory influence on spinal nociception.
The 
present experiments were designed to test whether activation of these neurons, 
referred to as "on-cells", is required as part of a positive feedback loop 
leading to secondary hyperalgesia in acute inflammation produced by topical 
application of mustard oil.
Activity of a characterized RVM neuron and paw 
withdrawals to heat (plantar surface) were recorded in barbiturate-anesthetized 
rats.
Following three baseline trials, mustard oil was applied to the skin above 
the knee.
Cell activity and paw withdrawal latencies were monitored for an 
additional 45min.
Application of mustard oil produced an increase in on-cell 
discharge that was associated with a substantial decrease in withdrawal latency 
of the ipsilateral paw.
Blocking on-cell activation using local infusion of the 
NMDA-receptor antagonist AP5 into the RVM prevented hyperalgesia.
Secondary 
thermal hyperalgesia following mustard oil was also associated with a 
significant decrease in the firing of "off-cells", a cell population thought to 
exert a net inhibitory influence on nociception.
Depression of off-cell firing 
was unaffected by AP5 microinjection.
The firing of "neutral cells", which have 
no documented role in nociceptive modulation, was unchanged following mustard 
oil and also unaffected by AP5 infusion in the RVM.
Brainstem descending 
controls are receiving increasing attention in efforts to understand 
hyperalgesia and persistent pain states.
The present experiments demonstrate 
that a novel, NMDA-mediated activation of on-cells is required for secondary 
thermal hyperalgesia in acute inflammation.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pain.2006.08.020
PMCID: PMC1888561
PMID: 16997469 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Asymptomatic anomalous pulmonary veins in a Siberian Husky <jats:p>A 2‐year‐old
 neutered male Siberian Husky presented with depression, weight loss and an inability to prehend food and water.
Cerebrospinal fluid was collected under general anaesthesia prior to euthanasia.
The elevated white cell count comprised mostly mononuclear cells.
Histological changes within the brain were variable and multifocal.
Non‐suppurative meningitis secondary to lymphoma was diagnosed.
At necropsy, abnormal venous drainage of the right cranial and middle lung lobes was found.
A dilated major pulmonary vein from these lobes passed across the lateral aspect of the right caudal lung lobe prior to entering the heart, and subpleural veins from the affected lobes were enlarged and tortuous.
These vascular abnormalities were considered incidental.
There were no apparent congenital abnormalities of the heart and the animal's clinical signs were related to lymphoma of the brain.</jats:p>
Sensory irritation tolerance and cross-tolerance in F-344 rats exposed to chlorine or formaldehyde gas 1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1984 Nov;76(2):319-27. doi: 
10.1016/0041-008x(84)90013-9.

Sensory irritation tolerance and cross-tolerance in F-344 rats exposed to 
chlorine or formaldehyde gas.

Chang JC
 Barrow CS.
Inhalation of chlorine (Cl2) or formaldehyde (HCHO) stimulates the trigeminal 
nerve endings in the nasal mucosa and results in respiratory rate depression in 
a concentration-dependent manner.
To determine tolerance and cross-tolerance, 
the concentration-response curves of respiratory depression were compared 
between naive rats and rats pre-exposed to Cl2 or HCHO.
Chlorine tolerance 
development was time and concentration dependent, being significant following a 
1-day (6 hr/day), 10 ppm exposure, and reaching the maximum in 4 days.
At 2.5 
ppm of Cl2, tolerance was significant only after 10 days of exposure.
Rats 
tolerant to Cl2 also showed cross-tolerance to HCHO.
Tolerance to HCHO was 
observed in rats exposed to 28 ppm for 4 days, but not in groups exposed to 15 
ppm for 1, 4, or 10 days.
However, significant cross-tolerance to Cl2 was 
evident following a 1-day exposure to 15 ppm HCHO, with greatest effect seen in 
the group exposed for 10 days.
Tolerance was reduced after a 7-day recovery 
following a 4-day exposure.
Cross-tolerance was reduced also, but to a much 
lesser extent.
These results suggest a common mechanism for tolerance and 
cross-tolerance development, but different reactive sites may exist for Cl2 and 
HCHO at the trigeminal nerve endings.
DOI: 10.1016/0041-008x(84)90013-9
PMID: 6495337 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The mTOR Signaling Pathway Regulates Pain-Related Synaptic Plasticity in Rat Entorhinal-Hippocampal Pathways <jats:sec><jats:title>Background</jats:title><jats:p> Our previous work demonstrated that persistent peripheral nociception (PPN) leads to synaptic plasticity and functional changes in the rat hippocampus. The protein kinase mTOR is a critical regulator of protein synthesis-dependent synaptic plasticity in the hippocampus as well as synaptic plasticity associated with central and peripheral pain sensitization. We examined the role of mTOR signaling in pain-associated entorhinal cortex (EC) - hippocampal synaptic plasticity to reveal possible cellular mechanisms underlying the effects of chronic pain on cognition and emotion. </jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p> Subcutaneous injection of bee venom (BV) into one hind paw to induce PPN resulted in sustained (&gt; 8 h) mTOR phospho-activation and enhanced phosphorylation of the mTOR target p70 S6 kinase (S6K) in the hippocampus. The magnitude and duration of long-term potentiation (LTP) in both EC - dentate gyrus (DG) and EC - CA1 synaptic pathways were elevated in BV-treated rats as measured by microelectrode array recording. Moreover
 the number of potentiated synapses in the hippocampus was markedly upregulated by BV-induced PPN.
Both elevated mTOR-S6K signaling and enhanced LTP induced by BV injection were reversed by systemic injection of the mTOR inhibitor rapamycin (RAPA).
Rats injected with BV exhibited markedly reduced ambulation and exploratory activity in the open field (signs of depression and anxiety) compared to controls, and these effects were also reversed by RAPA.
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusion</jats:title><jats:p> We suggest that PPN-induced enhancement of synaptic plasticity in EC - hippocampal pathways and the behavioral effects of PPN are dependent on mTOR-S6K signaling.
</jats:p></jats:sec>
Suppressive Effect of Juzen‐Taiho‐To on Lung Metastasis of B16 Melanoma Cells <i>In Vivo</i> <jats:p>Juzen‐Taiho‐To (JTT) is well known to be one of Kampo (Japanese herbal) medicine consisted of 10 component herbs and used for the supplemental therapy of cancer patients with remarkably success. However
 the precise mechanisms by which JTT could favorably modify the clinical conditions of cancer patients are not well defined.
The present study, therefore, was undertaken to examine the possible mechanisms of JTT on prevention of cancer metastasis using experimental mouse model.
JTT was well mixed with rodent chow at concentrations of either 0.2 or 1.0%, and administered orally <jats:italic>ad libitum</jats:italic>, which was started 1 week before tumor cell injection and continue throughout the experiment.
Oral administration of JTT at concentration 0.2 and 1.0% into C57BL/6 male mice significantly inhibited tumor metastasis in lungs, which was induced by the intravenous injection of 2 × 10<jats:sup>5</jats:sup> B16 melanoma cell.
JTT at a concentration of 1.0% also significantly suppressed lung metastasis of B16 melanoma cell from hind footpad in C57BL/6 mice.
In the second part of experiments, the influence of the depression of natural killer (NK) cell, natural killer T (NKT) cell and several types of cytokines on JTT‐mediated inhibition of tumor cell metastasis.
Intraperitoneal injection of anti asialo‐GM1 antibody against NK cells and anti NK‐1.1 monoclonal antibody (mAb) to NKT cells abrogated the inhibitory action of JTT on lung metastasis of B16 melanoma cells.
Although intraperitoneal administration of anti‐IFN‐<jats:italic>γ</jats:italic> mAb scarcely affected the inhibitory action of JTT on tumor cell metastasis, injection of amrinone, which used for IL‐12 suppression, significantly decreased the ability of JTT to prevent tumor cell metastasis.
These results strongly suggest that oral administration of JTT caused increase in the production of IL‐12, which is responsible for the activation of both NK cell and NKT cell, in the lungs and results in inhibition of B16 melanoma cell metastasis in the lungs.</jats:p>
[Suppression of allergic reaction of immediate type by spirazidine]. 1. Farmakol Toksikol. 1969 Sep-Oct;32(5):592-3.

[Suppression of allergic reaction of immediate type by spirazidine].

[Article in Russian]

Ado VA.

PMID: 5364679 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A newly designed method for removal of the pineal body
 and depression of convulsions and enhancement of exploratory movements by pinealectomy in mice.
1.
Endocrinol Jpn.
1978 Oct;25(5):407-13. doi: 10.1507/endocrj1954.25.407.
A newly designed method for removal of the pineal body, and depression of 
convulsions and enhancement of exploratory movements by pinealectomy in mice.
Hata T, Kita T.

We designed a simple technique for surgical excision of the pineal body in mice.
Such can be accomplished in 10 min by a skilled worker and there are no lesions 
whatever.
In pinealectomized El-strain mice the appearance of convulsions was 
inhibited up to 30 days, while intact El-mice were all fallen into convulsions 
by being shaken up and down on a flat carton.
Pentazole-induced convulsions 
propagate from one dd-mouse to another in an aggregated state, but such 
propagation did not occur in pinealectomized animals.
Exploratory movements of 
pinealectomized dd-mice increased as compared to intact animals and the increase 
was always more extensively observed in El-mice in which, even in the intact 
animals, the exploratory movements were much more than those of dd-mice.
From 
the above-mentioned experiment, it is considered that the pineal body plays a 
role not only in initiating but also in propagating convulsions, and that it may 
have a depressive action on motor activities in mice.
DOI: 10.1507/endocrj1954.25.407
PMID: 744166 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic mild stress and antidepressant treatment alter 5-HT1A receptor expression by modifying DNA methylation of a conserved Sp4 site 1. Neurobiol Dis. 2015 Oct;82:332-341. doi: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.07.002. Epub 2015 
Jul 15.

Chronic mild stress and antidepressant treatment alter 5-HT1A receptor 
expression by modifying DNA methylation of a conserved Sp4 site.

Le François B(1)
 Soo J(1), Millar AM(1), Daigle M(1), Le Guisquet AM(2), Leman 
S(2), Minier F(2), Belzung C(2), Albert PR(3).
Author information:
(1)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (Neuroscience), University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.
(2)Inserm U 930, Université François Rabelais, 37200 Tours, France.
(3)Ottawa Hospital Research Institute (Neuroscience), University of Ottawa, 
Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada; Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, 
University of Ottawa, Ottawa, ON K1H 8M5, Canada.
Electronic address: 
palbert@uottawa.ca.
The serotonin 1A receptor (5-HT1A), a critical regulator of the brain 
serotonergic tone, is implicated in major depressive disorder (MDD) where it is 
often found to be dys-regulated.
However, the extent to which stress and 
antidepressant treatment impact 5-HT1A expression in adults remains unclear.
To 
address this issue, we subjected adult male BALB/c mice to unpredictable chronic 
mild stress (UCMS) to induce a depression-like phenotype that was reversed by 
chronic treatment with the antidepressant imipramine.
In prefrontal cortex (PFC) 
and midbrain tissue, UCMS increased 5-HT1A RNA and protein levels, changes that 
are expected to decrease the brain serotonergic activity.
The stress-induced 
increase in 5-HT1A expression was paralleled by a specific increase in DNA 
methylation of the conserved -681 CpG promoter site, located within a Sp1-like 
element.
We show that the -681 CpG site is recognized and repressed by Sp4, the 
predominant neuronal Sp1-like factor and that Sp4-induced repression is 
attenuated by DNA methylation, despite a stress-induced increase in PFC Sp4 
levels.
These results indicate that adult life stress induces DNA methylation of 
a conserved promoter site, antagonizing Sp4 repression to increase 5-HT1A 
expression.
Chronic imipramine treatment fully reversed the UCMS-induced 
increase in methylation of the -681 CpG site in the PFC but not midbrain of 
stressed animals and also increased 5-HT1A expression in the PFC of control 
animals.
Incomplete reversal by imipramine of stress-induced changes in 5-HT1A 
methylation and expression indicates a persistence of stress vulnerability, and 
that sustained reversal of behavioral impairments may require additional 
pathways.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.nbd.2015.07.002
PMCID: PMC4640906
PMID: 26188176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: The authors declare no conflict of interest.
Effects of Stimulation and Blockade of Receptor on Depression-Like Behavior in Ovariectomized Female Rats <jats:p>The aim of the present study was to explore the hedonic effects of D<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>receptor agonist
 quinpirole and D<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>receptor antagonist, and sulpiride alone or in combination with a low dose of 17<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>-E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>-estradiol (17<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>-E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>) in the adult ovariectomized female rats (OVX).
OVX rats of Wistar strain were used in all experiments.
Two weeks after surgery rats were chronically treated with vehicle, a low dose of 17<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>-E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>(5.0 <jats:italic>μ</jats:italic>g/rat), quinpirole (0.1 mg/kg), sulpiride (10.0 mg/kg), quinpirole plus 17<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>-E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>, or sulpiride plus 17<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>-E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>for 14 days before the forced swimming test.
We found that sulpiride significantly decreased immobility time in the OVX females.
A combination of sulpiride with a low dose of 17<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>-E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>induced more profound decrease of immobility time in the OVX rats compared to the rats treated with sulpiride alone.
On the contrary, quinpirole failed to modify depression-like behavior in the OVX rats.
In addition, quinpirole significantly blocked the antidepressant-like effect of 17<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>-E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>in OVX rats.
Thus, the D<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>receptor antagonist sulpiride alone or in combination with a low dose of 17<jats:italic>β</jats:italic>-E<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>exerted antidepressant-like effect in OVX female rats, while the D<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>receptor agonist quinpirole produced depressant-like profile on OVX rats.</jats:p>
Marble Spleen Disease in Pheasants in Korea. 1. J Vet Med Sci. 2001 Jun;63(6):699-701. doi: 10.1292/jvms.63.699.

Marble spleen disease in pheasants in Korea.

Lee JK(1)
 Choi JH, Lee DW, Kim SJ, Fitzgerald SD, Lee YS, Kim DY.
Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Pathology, College of Veterinary Medicine and 
Agricultural Biotechnology, Seoul National University, Suwon, Korea.
Two pheasants maintained in outdoor closed pen died within several days after 
having a history of depression.
On necropsy, the spleens from both pheasants 
were enlarged about 3 times of their normal size and appeared mottled in color 
varying white to red.
Histopathologically, there were diffuse severe follicular 
necrosis in the spleen and congestion and edema in the lung.
Intranuclear 
basophilic inclusion bodies, which are strongly positive to group II avian 
adenovirus with immunohistochemistry, were noted in the spleen.
DOI: 10.1292/jvms.63.699
PMID: 11459022 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
In vivo Dilatation of the Ductus Arteriosus by Rho Kinase Inhibition in the Rat <jats:p>&lt;i&gt;Background:&lt;/i&gt; Fasudil hydrochloride
 a Rho kinase inhibitor, was reported to dilate the constricted ductus arteriosus in vitro, and was suggested as a neonatal bridge to heart surgery.
&lt;i&gt;Objectives:&lt;/i&gt; To clarify the in vivo effectiveness of fasudil to dilate the neonatal ductus arteriosus, and its usefulness as a bridge to heart surgery.
&lt;i&gt;Methods:&lt;/i&gt; We studied the dose and timing of administration of fasudil in the neonatal rat.
Postnatal ductal closure was studied on the 21st gestational day following cesarean section and incubation for 30–480 min in room air at 33°C, with a rapid whole-body freezing method.
In control rats, the ductus closed rapidly after birth, and the ductal diameter was 0.80 and 0.12 mm at 0 and 30 min after birth.
Fasudil was injected peritoneally into the neonate, and the ductus was studied 30 min after injection and 60 min after birth.
&lt;i&gt;Results:&lt;/i&gt; Fasudil, 10 mg/kg, injected within 5 min after birth, dilated the ductus completely to 0.8 mm, and the dose used clinically, 1 mg/kg, dilated the ductus to 0.4 mm.
The ductus-dilating effect of fasudil decreased rapidly as the neonatal ductus constricted.
Fasudil, 100 mg/kg, dilated the ductus completely, but induced severe respiratory depression and frequent death in 1-hour-old rats.
&lt;i&gt;Conclusions:&lt;/i&gt; Fasudil dilates the neonatal ductus arteriosus dose-dependently in the rat.
Fasudil in large doses dilates the neonatal ductus completely, but is associated with fatal side effects, including respiratory depression.</jats:p>
Effects of Dopamine and Other Catecholamines on the Splanchnic Circulation <jats:p> Studies were conducted to evaluate the effects of dopamine (3
 4-dihydroxyphenylethylamine) and other catecholamines on the mesenteric vascular bed in dogs.
Mesenteric and hepatic artery blood flows were measured with electromagnetic blood flow transducers.
Catecholamines were infused intra-arterially into a branch-of the mesenteric artery.
Dopamine consistently decreased mesenteric and hepatic artery blood flows at all dose levels studied (5–100 mg/kg).
Phenoxybenzamine (12.5 mg/kg) blocked the effects of norepinephrine (0.05–1.0 μg/kg) and reversed the responses to dopamine in the mesenteric bed to those of pure vasodilation (no transient constriction was observed) but failed to abolish the constrictor action of dopamine on the hepatic artery.
Propranolol or haloperidol, when administered with the phenoxybenzamine, did not attenuate the mesenteric responses to dopamine.
Haloperidol prevented the hepatic artery vasoconstriction produced by dopamine but did not alter isoproterenol-induced hepatic artery vasodilation.
No competitive action was observed between dopamine and norepinephrine or isoproterenol.
These results suggest that (1) dopamine produces selective vasodilation of the mesenteric bed which is not blocked by haloperidol, and (2) dopamine has a unique action on the hepatic vascular bed which is blocked by haloperidol.
</jats:p>
Repeated co-administrations of alcohol- and methamphetamine-produced anxiogenic effect could be associated with the neurotoxicity in the dentate gyrus 1. J Neural Transm (Vienna). 2011 Nov;118(11):1559-69. doi: 
10.1007/s00702-011-0645-2. Epub 2011 Apr 17.

Repeated co-administrations of alcohol- and methamphetamine-produced anxiogenic 
effect could be associated with the neurotoxicity in the dentate gyrus.

Chuang JY(1)
 Chang WT, Cherng CG, Kao GS, Yu L.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Basic Medical Sciences, National Cheng Kung University College 
of Medicine, Tainan, Taiwan, ROC.
To date, joint use of alcohol (EtOH) and methamphetamine (MA) represents a 
specific combination of polydrug abuse.
Repeated administrations of EtOH, MA, 
and combined EtOH and MA were assessed for their effects on brain cell toxicity, 
cell mitosis and anxiety/depression-like behavior.
We found that repeated 
co-administrations of EtOH and MA produced profound anxiogenic effects.
Specifically, combined EtOH and MA decreased open arm exploratory responses in 
the elevated plus maze test.
Moreover, combined EtOH and MA significantly 
decreased immobile responses in the tail suspension test.
MA, EtOH, and their 
combination all reduced the number of NeuN-positive cells in amygdala (Amg), 
while neither of them altered the number of NeuN-positive cells in striatum (St) 
or prefrontal cortex (PFC).
Combined EtOH and MA decreased the number of 
NeuN-positive cells in dentate gyrus (DG).
EtOH, MA, and combined EtOH and MA 
all diminished comparable number of GFAP-positive cells in Amg, DG, and St.
Neither of these treatment affected the number of GFAP-positive cells in PFC.
EtOH, MA, and combined EtOH and MA generated comparable inhibiting effects on 
cell proliferation in the subventricular zone (SVZ) and DG.
These results, taken 
together, suggest that repeated co-administrations of MA and EtOH may produce an 
observable anxiogenic effect.
This combination-produced anxiogenic effect could 
be associated with neuronal loss in the dentate gurus.
In contrast, such an 
anxiogenic effect is less likely related to this combination-caused glial 
toxicity in limbic regions or cell proliferation-inhibiting effect in the SVZ or 
DG.
DOI: 10.1007/s00702-011-0645-2
PMID: 21499940 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Impairment of macrophage functions after ingestion of Plasmodium falciparum-infected erythrocytes or isolated malarial pigment. <jats:p>Human monocyte-derived macrophages ingest diamide-treated red blood cells (RBC)
 anti-D immunoglobulin (Ig)G-opsonized RBC, or Plasmodium falciparum ring-stage parasitized RBC (RPRBC), degrade ingested hemoglobin rapidly, and can repeat the phagocytic cycle.
Monocytes fed with trophozoite-parasitized RBC (TPRBC), which contain malarial pigment, or fed with isolated pigment are virtually unable to degrade the ingested material and to repeat the phagocytic cycle.
Monocytes fed with pigment display a long-lasting oxidative burst that does not occur when they phagocytose diamide-treated RBC or RPRBC.
The phorbol myristate acetate-elicited oxidative burst is irreversibly suppressed in monocytes fed with TPRBC or pigment, but not in monocytes fed with diamide-treated or IgG-opsonized RBC.
This pattern of inhibition of phagocytosis and oxidative burst suggests that malarial pigment is responsible for the toxic effects.
Pigment iron released in the monocyte phagolysosome may be the responsible element.
3% of total pigment iron is labile and easily detached under conditions simulating the internal environment of the phagolysosome, i.e., pH 5.5 and 10 microM H2O2.
Iron liberated from pigment could account for the lipid peroxidation and increased production of malondialdehyde observed in monocytes fed with pigment or in RBC ghosts and liposomes incubated at pH 6.5 in presence of pigment and low amounts of H2O2.
Removal of the labile iron fraction from pigment by repeated treatments with 0.1 mM H2O2 at pH 5.5 reduces pigment toxicity.
It is suggested that iron released from ingested pigment is responsible for the intoxication of monocytes.
In acute and chronic falciparum infections, circulating and tissue-resident phagocytes are seen filled with TPRBC and pigment particles over long periods of time.
Moreover, human monocytes previously fed with TPRBC are unable to neutralize pathogenic bacteria, fungi, and tumor cells, and macrophage responses decline during the course of human and animal malaria.
The present results may offer a mechanistic explanation for depression of cellular immunity in malaria.</jats:p>
Effect of naloxone on gonadotrophin secretion at various stages of development in the ewe lamb 1. J Reprod Fertil. 1990 Jul;89(2):503-9. doi: 10.1530/jrf.0.0890503.

Effect of naloxone on gonadotrophin secretion at various stages of development 
in the ewe lamb.

Rawlings NC(1)
 Churchill IJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Physiological Sciences, Western College of 
Veterinary Medicine, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.
Spring-born crossbred ewe lambs were raised in a natural photoperiod and saline 
(N = 6) or naloxone (1 mg/kg) in saline (N = 6) was injected (i.m.)
every 2 h 
for 6 h at 5, 10 and 15 weeks of age and for 8 h at 20, 25 and 30 weeks of age.
Blood samples were taken every 12 min during treatment periods.
Naloxone had no 
effect on time to first oestrus (controls 235 +/- 6 days, naloxone 242 +/- 7 
days).
Mean serum LH concentrations and LH pulse frequency were elevated by 
naloxone in ewe lambs at 20, 25, and 30 weeks of age (P less than 0.05).
The 
only FSH response to naloxone was a depression of mean serum concentrations at 
30 weeks of age (P less than 0.05).
LH pulse amplitude was elevated at 5 weeks 
of age in all ewe lambs and declined thereafter to a nadir at 30 weeks of age in 
control, but not in naloxone-treated animals (P less than 0.05).
LH pulse 
frequency was elevated at 10 weeks of age in control ewe lambs and in all 
animals at 30 weeks of age (P less than 0.05).
FSH pulse frequency declined from 
5 weeks of age in control ewe lambs (P less than 0.05), with very few pulses 
noted in 25- and 30-week-old animals.
We conclude that (1) opioidergic 
suppression of LH, but not FSH, secretion developed at 20 weeks of age in the 
growing ewe lambs used in the present study, with no obvious change in 
suppression before the onset of first oestrus: (2) pulsatile FSH secretion 
occurred in the young ewe lamb but was lost as the lamb matured: (3) attainment 
of sexual maturity was preceded by an elevation in LH pulse frequency.
DOI: 10.1530/jrf.0.0890503
PMID: 2119430 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long-lasting changes in motoneuron discharges following 50Hz tetanization of afferent nerves in cats. 1. Nihon Ika Daigaku Zasshi. 1991 Jun;58(3):329-41. doi: 10.1272/jnms1923.58.329.

[Long-lasting changes in motoneuron discharges following 50 Hz tetanization of 
afferent nerves in cats].

[Article in Japanese]

Aoki T(1)
 Fujita Y.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Nippon Medical School, Japan.
The effects of 50 Hz tetanization on motoneuron discharges were studied in 
non-immobilized, non-anesthetized, decerebrate cats.
Motoneuron discharges were 
monitored by recording either muscle (hamstring muscles or foot extensors) 
action potentials or ventral root (L7 or S1) discharges.
In the latter case both 
ventral and dorsal roots were cut and corresponding dorsal roots were 
stimulated.
It was found that in 13 out of 32 cases the tetanization of the 
sciatic nerve at 4.0T for 5 s produced enhancement of monosynaptically evoked 
muscle action potentials (H-wave) for 20-25 min.
Three categories of potentials 
were distinguished in ventral root discharge according to latencies and 
thresholds: monosynaptic, polysynaptic and late potentials.
When the dorsal root 
was tetanized at 2.5-5.0T for 5 s, all of these 3 categories of potentials 
exhibited an enhancement of the potential lasting for more than 30 min.
The late 
potential, which was the longest-latency polysynaptic potential (4.7-6.5 ms), 
was the most sensitive to the tetanization.
Its enhancement could develop 
slowly, yet the degree of the enhancement was the greatest, as compared with 
other two categories of potentials.
In contrast, the enhancement of these 
potentials were always immediate.
In 15 out of 46 cases at least one of the 3 
categories of potentials exhibited the enhancement.
Since the long-lasting 
changes were induced only with the strength enough to activate polysynaptic 
pathways, interneurons were considered to be responsible for these plastic 
changes.
The monosynaptic potential could show a long-lasting depression 
following the tetanization.
DOI: 10.1272/jnms1923.58.329
PMID: 1880200 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Late clinical and magnetic resonance imaging follow up of Nipah virus infection 1. J Neurol Neurosurg Psychiatry. 2003 Jan;74(1):131-3. doi:
10.1136/jnnp.74.1.131.

Late clinical and magnetic resonance imaging follow up of Nipah virus infection.

Lim CC(1)
 Lee WL, Leo YS, Lee KE, Chan KP, Ling AE, Oh H, Auchus AP, Paton NI, 
Hui F, Tambyah PA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuroradiology, National Neuroscience Institute, 11 Jalan Tan 
Tock Seng, Singapore 308433, Republic of Singapore.
tchoyoson_lim@ttsh.com.sg

The Nipah virus is a newly identified paramyxovirus responsible for an outbreak 
of fatal encephalitis in Malaysia and Singapore.
This paper reports the follow 
up clinical and magnetic resonance imaging findings in 22 affected subjects.
Of 
13 patients with encephalitis, one died, one was lost to follow up, and seven 
recovered.
Among the four remaining patients, one had residual sixth nerve 
palsy, another suffered from severe clinical depression, and a third patient had 
evidence of retinal artery occlusion.
One patient with delayed onset Horner 
syndrome had a single lesion in the cervical spinal cord.
The brain magnetic 
resonance findings were stable or improved in nine patients over 18 months of 
follow up.
Among a second group of nine asymptomatic seropositive abattoir 
workers, magnetic resonance examination in seven subjects revealed discrete 
small lesions in the brain; similar to those detected in encephalitis patients.
These findings suggest that in addition to encephalitis, the newly discovered 
Nipah virus affects the spinal cord and the retina.
Late clinical and 
radiological findings can occur in Nipah virus infections as with other 
paramyxoviruses.
DOI: 10.1136/jnnp.74.1.131
PMCID: PMC1738187
PMID: 12486285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Related Effects of Copper
 Molybdenum and Sulfide on Performance, Hematology and Copper stores of Growing Pigs 1.
J Anim Sci.
1973 Oct;37(4):936-41. doi: 10.2527/jas1973.374936x.
Related effects of copper, molybdenum and sulfide on performance, hematology and 
copper stores of growing pigs.
Kline RD, Corzo MA, Hays VW, Cromwell GL.
DOI: 10.2527/jas1973.374936x
PMID: 4747186 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Immune Response and Cytokines in Septic Rats Undergoing Blood Transfusion 1. J Surg Res. 1998 Dec;80(2):295-9. doi: 10.1006/jsre.1998.5448.

Immune response and cytokines in septic rats undergoing blood transfusion.

Salinas JC(1)
 Cabezali R, Torcal J, Larrad L, Sousa R, Navarro M, Lozano R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery A, University of Zaragoza, Medical School, Avda.
San 
Juan Bosco, 15, Zaragoza, 50009, Spain.
BACKGROUND: Intrabdominal sepsis and allogeneic blood transfusion have been 
associated with a depression of the immune response in patients undergoing 
surgery.
Some authors have considered that an already immunocompromised host is 
probably primed for a potential detrimental effect of allogeneic blood.
The aim 
of this paper is to ascertain the effects of allogeneic blood transfusion on the 
lymphocyte subsets and cytokines in septic rats.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: Thirty rats were allotted into three groups: Sham-CLP, 
anesthesia and laparotomy; CLP, cecal ligation and puncture; CLP+BT, CLP and 
allogeneic blood transfusion.
Preoperatively and on the 1st, 3rd, and 7th 
postoperative days, the cell percentages of lymphocyte subpopulations, the IL-2 
receptor expression, and the IL-1, IL-2, TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma were measured 
in blood by flow cytometry and ELISA:
RESULTS: CLP+BT rats showed on Day 3 a decrease of the CD4+%, an increase of the 
IL-2R expression directly correlated to the increase of the CD8+% phenotype, a 
steady increase of IL-1 levels, a decrease of the TNF-alpha levels on the 1st 
and 3rd days, and a decrease of the IL-2 and IFN-gamma on Day 1.
CONCLUSIONS: An accumulative effect of the immunodepression induced by sepsis 
was observed when allogeneic blood transfusion is added.
Blood transfusion + 
sepsis induces an extensive impairment on cellular immune response and an 
initial cytokine downregulation, except for IL-1.
Copyright 1998 Academic Press.
DOI: 10.1006/jsre.1998.5448
PMID: 9878327 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Establishing a probabilistic reversal learning test in mice: Evidence for the processes mediating reward-stay and punishment-shift behaviour and for their modulation by serotonin 1. Neuropharmacology. 2012 Nov;63(6):1012-21. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.07.025. Epub 2012 Jul 21.

Establishing a probabilistic reversal learning test in mice: evidence for the 
processes mediating reward-stay and punishment-shift behaviour and for their 
modulation by serotonin.

Ineichen C(1)
 Sigrist H, Spinelli S, Lesch KP, Sautter E, Seifritz E, Pryce CR.
Author information:
(1)Preclinical Laboratory for Translational Research into Affective Disorders, 
Clinic for Affective Disorders & General Psychiatry, Psychiatric University 
Hospital Zurich, August Forel-Strasse 7, CH-8008 Zurich, Switzerland.
Valid animal models of psychopathology need to include behavioural readouts 
informed by human findings.
In the probabilistic reversal learning (PRL) task, 
human subjects are confronted with serial reversal of the contingency between 
two operant stimuli and reward/punishment and, superimposed on this, a low 
probability (0.2) of punished correct responses/rewarded incorrect responses.
In 
depression, reward-stay and reversals completed are unaffected but 
response-shift following punished correct response trials, referred to as 
negative feedback sensitivity (NFS), is increased.
The aims of this study were 
to: establish an operant spatial PRL test appropriate for mice; obtain evidence 
for the processes mediating reward-stay and punishment-shift responding; and 
assess effects thereon of genetically- and pharmacologically-altered serotonin 
(5-HT) function.
The study was conducted with wildtype (WT) and heterozygous 
mutant (HET) mice from a 5-HT transporter (5-HTT) null mutant strain.
Mice were 
mildly food deprived and reward was sugar pellet and punishment was 5-s time 
out.
Mice exhibited high motivation and adaptive reversal performance.
Increased 
probability of punished correct response (PCR) trials per session (p = 0.1, 0.2 
or 0.3) led to monotonic decrease in reward-stay and reversals completed, 
suggesting accurate reward prediction.
NFS differed from chance-level at p PCR = 
0.1, suggesting accurate punishment prediction, whereas NFS was at chance-level 
at p = 0.2-0.3.
At p PCR = 0.1, HET mice exhibited lower NFS than WT mice.
The 
5-HTT blocker escitalopram was studied acutely at p PCR = 0.2: a low dose 
(0.5-1.5 mg/kg) resulted in decreased NFS, increased reward-stay and increased 
reversals completed, and similarly in WT and HET mice.
This study demonstrates 
that testing PRL in mice can provide evidence on the regulation of reward and 
punishment processing that is, albeit within certain limits, of relevance to 
human emotional-cognitive processing, its dysfunction and treatment.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2012.07.025
PMID: 22824190 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Analysis of therapeutic and immunologic effects of R24 anti-GD3 monoclonal antibody in 37 patients with metastatic melanoma 1. Cancer. 2000 Jun 15;88(12):2693-702.

Analysis of therapeutic and immunologic effects of R(24) anti-GD3 monoclonal 
antibody in 37 patients with metastatic melanoma.

Kirkwood JM(1)
 Mascari RA, Edington HD, Rabkin MS, Day RS, Whiteside TL, Vlock 
DR, Shipe-Spotloe JM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine, University of Pittsburgh Medical Center, PA 
15213-2582, USA.
BACKGROUND: Antitumor effects of antibodies against ganglioside antigens of 
melanoma have been reported, but neither optimal doses nor mechanisms have been 
established.
METHODS: This Phase IB trial of the murine immunoglobulin IgG(3) monoclonal 
antibody R(24) against disialoganglioside GD3 was conducted with 37 patients to 
define better the dose-response relation and mechanism of action of R(24) in 
patients with metastatic melanoma.
RESULTS: Dose-limiting toxicity consisted of a pulmonary capillary leak syndrome 
in 3 of 5 patients in the 80 mg/M(2)/day dosage tier.
Serial blood and tumor 
biopsy samples were obtained prior to therapy and on Days 5, 9, and 22 following 
R(24) infusion.
Tumor biopsy-infiltrating lymphocytes were enumerated in 
peritumoral, endotumoral, and perivascular compartments: endotumoral CD4(+) and 
CD8(+) T cells and HLA-DR(+) T cells increased over time on R(24) antibody.
Endotumoral CD4 lymphoid infiltrate activation (DR expression) and 
antibody-dependent cytotoxicity were the greatest in the one patient who 
achieved a complete response.
CONCLUSIONS: Clinical response was associated with depression in natural killer 
(CD56(+) and CD56(+)DR(+)) blood cells (P = 0.03) and was associated with R(24) 
dosage (P = 0.01).
A complete response that lasted 2 years and a partial 
response that lasted 2 months occurred at a dose of 1 mg/M(2)/day.
The limited 
number of clinical responses observed in this trial hampered the correlation of 
antitumor and immune parameters but provided a rational foundation for the 
future evaluation of antiganglioside antibodies.
Copyright 2000 American Cancer Society.
PMID: 10870051 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Quantitative Analysis of Calcium-Dependent Vesicle Recruitment and Its Functional Role at the Calyx of Held Synapse <jats:p>Recruitment of release-ready vesicles at synapses is one of the important factors
 which determine dynamic properties of signaling between neurons in the brain.
It has been shown that the rate of vesicle recruitment is accelerated by strong synaptic activity.
An elevated concentration of calcium ions in the presynaptic terminal ([Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>]<jats:sub>i</jats:sub>) has been proposed to be responsible for this effect.
However, the precise relationship between [Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>]<jats:sub>i</jats:sub>and recruitment has not been established yet, and the functional consequences of accelerated recruitment during synaptic activity have not been quantified experimentally.
To probe the intracellular Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>dependence of vesicle recruitment and to examine its functional role during trains of action potential (AP)-like stimuli, we monitored [Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>]<jats:sub>i</jats:sub>and synaptic responses simultaneously with paired recordings at the calyx of Held synapse.
We found that a distinct, rapidly releasing vesicle pool is replenished with a rate that increases linearly with [Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>]<jats:sub>i</jats:sub>, without any apparent cooperativity.
The slope factor for this increase is ∼1 pool/(μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>·s).
Blocking Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>-dependent recruitment specifically with a calmodulin binding peptide revealed that the steady-state EPSCs during 100 Hz AP-like trains were maintained through this Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>-dependent recruitment mechanism.
Using a simple model of vesicle dynamics, we estimated that the recruitment rate accelerated 10-fold during the steady-state compared with the rate at resting [Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>]<jats:sub>i</jats:sub>.
We could also demonstrate an approximate sixfold increase in release probability (facilitation) during the initial 5–15 AP-like stimuli of such trains in our experimental condition, regardless of EPSC depression.</jats:p>
INHIBITION BY INDOMETHACIN OF OVULATION INDUCED BY HUMAN CHORIONIC GONADOTROPHIN IN IMMATURE RATS PRIMED WITH PREGNANT MARE SERUM GONADOTROPHIN <jats:p>Treatment of immature rats with pregnant mare serum gonadotrophin followed by human chorionic gonadotrophin (HCG) caused an acute and temporary increase in concentrations of progesterone
 testosterone and oestradiol in plasma with maximum levels 3 h after the administration of HCG.</jats:p>
      <jats:p>Concurrent injection of indomethacin and HCG reduced, in a dose-dependent manner, the mean number of ova shed and this was accompanied by a dose-dependent decrease in concentrations of plasma progesterone and testosterone but not of oestradiol when they were measured 3 h after the injection of HCG.
The minimum effective dose that blocked ovulation completely at 0 h abolished the acute increase of progesterone and testosterone, suggesting that prostaglandins act on ovulation by stimulating steroidogenesis at an early stage in the preovulatory process.
The anti-ovulatory action of the minimum effective dose at 0 h became progressively less potent as the time between injection of HCG and administration of indomethacin was increased, although plasma concentrations of progesterone and testosterone measured at autopsy 18 h after treatment with HCG had not changed appreciably.
When indomethacin was administered 10 h after HCG, the relationship between the dose of indomethacin and the mean number of ova differed from that observed when simultaneous injections of indomethacin and HCG were given, and the minimum effective dose that prevented ovulation was much higher than that at 0 h, suggesting that prostaglandins act differently on ovulation in the later stage of the preovulatory process.</jats:p>
      <jats:p>It was concluded that prostaglandins may mediate the action of HCG on ovulation through two mechanisms which operate at different stages of the preovulatory process.</jats:p>
High performing rats are more sensitive toward catecholaminergic activity enhancer (CAE) compounds than their low performing peers 1. Life Sci. 1996;58(11):945-52. doi: 10.1016/0024-3205(96)00037-9.

High performing rats are more sensitive toward catecholaminergic activity 
enhancer (CAE) compounds than their low performing peers.

Knoll J(1)
 Knoll B, Miklya I.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Semmelweis University of Medicine, Budapest, 
Hungary.
Two breeds of rats, Charles River Wistar [Crl(Wi)Br.]
and HSD Wistar [Wistar per 
LATI (Budapest) Br.
], with remarkable difference in learning performance were 
selected.
The rats were trained in the shuttle box with 100 trials per day and 
the number of conditioned avoidance responses (CARs), the escape failures (EFs) 
to the unconditioned stimulus and the intersignal reactions (IRs) were counted 
and evaluated by multi-way analysis of variance (ANOVA).
Rats of the Crl (Wi) 
breed proved to be the 'low performing' (LP) animals and rats of the Wistar per 
LATI (Budapest) breed the 'high performing' (HP) ones.
The HP rats produced 
higher number of CARs (p<0.001), lower number of EFs (P<0.05) and higher number 
of IRs (P<0.01) than their LP peers.
Significantly higher amounts of 
noradrenaline from the locus coeruleus and serotonin from the raphe were 
released in the HP than in the LP rats (p<0.01).
There was no difference between 
HP and LP rats in the amount of dopamine released from the striatum, the 
substantia nigra and the tuberculum olfactorium.
The catecholaminergic activity 
enhancer (CAE) substance, 1-phenyl-2-propylaminopentane HCl, [(-)PPAP], which 
enhances action potential-transmitter release coupling in the catecholaminergic 
neurons, fully antagonized in a dose of 1 mg/kg, tetrabenazine-induced learning 
depression in HP rats and this dose was ineffective in LP rats.
The findings 
were regarded as further support for the view that endogenous CAE substances 
regulate catecholaminergic activity in the brain and (-)PPAP acts via this 
regulation.
DOI: 10.1016/0024-3205(96)00037-9
PMID: 8786700 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
INHALATION TOXICITY OF DIOXOLE AND DIOXOLANE COMPOUNDS IN THE RAT 1. Drug Chem Toxicol. 2001 Feb;24(1):1-17. doi: 10.1081/dct-100103082.

Inhalation toxicity of Dioxole and Dioxolane compounds in the rat.

Kennedy GL(1)
 O'Neill AJ, Valentine R.

Author information:
(1)Haskell Laboratory for Toxicology, DuPont Company, 1090 Elkton Road, Newark, 
DE 19714, USA.
Four chemicals (Dioxole 418, Dioxolane 418, Dioxolane 416 and Dioxolane 456) 
which are used as stabilizers in highresolution image were tested or both their 
acute and repeated inhalation toxicity in the rat using nose-only exposures.
Acute studies determined the lethal concentrations following a single 4-hour 
exposure; repeated exposure inhalation studies determined the potency and target 
tissue(s) following 6-hour/day exposures, 5 days/week for 2 weeks.
Each of the 
chemicals was at least mildly toxic acutely with approximate lethal 
concentrations of > 1,500 ppm for Dioxole 418, 1,300 ppm for Dioxolane 418, 
1,700 ppm for Dioxolane 416, and 4,300 ppm for Dioxolane 456.
No specific 
unusual clinical signs of response were seen in the rats exposed acutely.
Repeated exposures with Dioxole 418 and Dioxolane 418 resulted in no evidence of 
toxicity with NOAEL's being 440 and 500 ppm respectively (the highest 
concentrations tested).
Repeated exposures to 250 ppm Dioxolane 456 were not 
tolerated with mortalities observed after exposure.
Severe bone marrow 
hypoplasia along with reductions in platelet and neutrophil counts were observed 
at this concentration with less severe hemopoietic changes seen also at 10 and 
51 ppm.
The no-effect level for Dioxolane 456 was determined to be 10 ppm in 
female rats and I ppm in males.
The same hemopoietic effects were seen with 
Dioxolane 416 at exposures of 53 ppm or greater in males but not in females 
exposed to 53 ppm Dioxolane 416.
Hepatocellular hypertrophy and depression of 
serum alkaline phosphatase activity were seen in male rats exposed to 500 but 
not 53 ppm Dioxolane 416.
Testicular degeneration was also seen in rats exposed 
to 500 ppm Dioxolane 416.
The NOAEL was 5 ppm for the chemical.
DOI: 10.1081/dct-100103082
PMID: 11307631 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic Idiopathic Neutropenia in a Cat <jats:p>Persistent neutropenia (0‐0.6 × I0<jats:sup>9</jats:sup> neutrophils/1) was documented during a 10‐month period in a 4‐year‐old spayed female domestic shorthair cat that was presented for anorexia and depression. Salient abnormalities detected on physical examination were fever (40.3<jats:sup>o</jats:sup>C)
 dehydration, and gingivitis.
The cat was neutropenic (0.5 × 10<jats:sup>9</jats:sup> neutrophils/1) and an enzyme‐linked immunosorbent assay (ELISA) test for feline leukemia virus was negative.
A bone marrow aspirate showed decreased numbers of mature granulocytic cells.
<jats:italic>In vitro</jats:italic> bone marrow cultures for colony‐forming units‐granulocyte/macrophage (CFU‐GM) were performed comparing bone marrow from the patient with that of a normal cat.
The patient had fewer CFU‐GM than the control.
The number of CFU‐GM increased when bone marrow mononuclear cells were cultured in the presence of 10<jats:sup>‐5</jats:sup> and 10<jats:sup>‐6</jats:sup> mol/1 of hydrocortisone, but the cat did not respond to oral prednisolone therapy.
The pathogenesis of the neutropenia in this cat remains obscure, but resembles the chronic idiopathic neutropenia syndrome of man.</jats:p>
Lipid Composition of rat brain myelin in triethyl tin-induced edema 1. J Lipid Res. 1971 Sep;12(5):570-9.

Lipid composition of rat brain myelin in triethyl tin-induced edema.

Eto Y
 Suzuki K, Suzuki K.

Chronic triethyl tin intoxication was induced in young adult rats by oral 
feeding of triethyl tin sulfate.
Progressively severe brain edema developed 
during the 3-month experimental period.
The yield of myelin from the brains of 
the experimental animals decreased to almost half normal per brain, but the 
isolated myelin appeared morphologically normal.
The analysis of whole brain 
showed corresponding decreases in proteolipid protein and total lipid, 
particularly galactolipids.
The proportions of the major constituents of 
isolated myelin (chloroform-methanol-insoluble residue, proteolipid protein, and 
total lipid) were unchanged despite the low yield.
However, the proportion of 
cholesterol increased from 16 to 21% dry weight, and that of total galactolipid 
decreased from 21 to 15%, as the yield of myelin decreased.
This decrease of 
total galactolipid was mainly due to the decrease in cerebroside.
Total 
phospholipid remained constant initially but showed a slight decrease toward the 
end of the experiment, due mostly to decreased ethanolamine phospholipid.
There 
was no preferential loss or preservation of phosphatidalethanolamine.
The fatty 
acid composition of sulfatide showed statistically significant shifts to less 
long-chain fatty acids and less monoenoic acids, but cerebroside and 
sphingomyelin did not show significant changes in the fatty acid composition.
There was no increase in esterified cholesterol.
These findings generally 
support our hypothesis of nonspecific chemical abnormalities of the myelin 
sheath undergoing secondary degeneration.
In an acute experiment, a single 
intraperitoneal injection of triethyl tin sulfate produced acute and transient 
brain edema.
There were slight decreases in the yield of myelin, but no 
detectable changes in the chemical composition.
PMID: 5098393 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Verbal learning by major depressive disorder patients during treatment with fluoxetine or amitriptyline 1. Int Clin Psychopharmacol. 1994 Spring;9(1):35-40. doi: 
10.1097/00004850-199400910-00006.

Verbal learning by major depressive disorder patients during treatment with 
fluoxetine or amitriptyline.

Richardson JS(1)
 Keegan DL, Bowen RC, Blackshaw SL, Cebrian-Perez S, Dayal N, 
Saleh S, Shrikhande S.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, Canada.
After 1 week of a single-blind placebo period, and prior to being randomly 
assigned to receive treatment with either fluoxetine or amitriptyline, patients 
meeting strict criteria for a diagnosis of major depressive disorder were given 
an auditory verbal learning test of working memory, and a blood sample was 
drawn.
After 3 weeks of drug treatment with either amitriptyline or fluoxetine, 
the patients' symptoms were evaluated, the verbal learning test was repeated, 
and a second blood sample was taken.
The clinical evaluation, the verbal 
learning test and the blood drawing were repeated a third time 3 weeks after the 
second assessment.
The amount of anticholinergic activity in the blood samples 
was measured by a competitive radioligand binding assay and expressed in 
atropine equivalents.
Analyses of variance indicated that there were no 
significant differences at the predrug Assessment 1 between patients 
subsequently assigned to the fluoxetine group compared with those assigned to 
the amitriptyline group.
At Assessments 2 and 3, the fluoxetine and the 
amitriptyline groups showed equal clinical improvement but patients receiving 
amitriptyline did not perform as well on the verbal learning task.
Serum 
anticholinergic activity at Assessments 2 and 3 was considerably higher in the 
amitriptyline group.
This supports the hypothesis that blockade of muscarinic 
receptors impairs working memory formation.
Equally effective antidepressant 
drugs with little or no anticholinergic action, such as fluoxetine, may be 
preferable in patients with pre-existing mild cognitive impairment or in 
patients where a slight reduction in cognitive performance is not acceptable.
DOI: 10.1097/00004850-199400910-00006
PMID: 8195581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Molecular determinants for selective recognition of antidepressants in the human serotonin and norepinephrine transporters <jats:p>
            Inhibitors of the serotonin transporter (SERT) and norepinephrine transporter (NET) are widely used in the treatment of major depressive disorder. Although SERT/NET selectivity is a key determinant for the therapeutic properties of these drugs
 the molecular determinants defining SERT/NET selectivity are poorly understood.
In this study, the structural basis for selectivity of the SERT selective inhibitor citalopram and the structurally closely related NET selective inhibitor talopram is delineated.
A systematic structure-activity relationship study allowed identification of the substituents that control activity and selectivity toward SERT and NET and revealed a common pattern showing that SERT and NET have opposite preference for the stereochemical configuration of these inhibitors.
Mutational analysis of nonconserved SERT/NET residues within the central substrate binding site was performed to determine the molecular basis for inhibitor selectivity.
Changing only five residues in NET to the complementary residues in SERT transferred a SERT-like affinity profile for
            <jats:italic>R</jats:italic>
            - and
            <jats:italic>S</jats:italic>
            -citalopram into NET, showing that the selectivity of these compounds is determined by amino acid differences in the central binding site of the transporters.
In contrast, the activity of
            <jats:italic>R</jats:italic>
            - and
            <jats:italic>S</jats:italic>
            -talopram was largely unaffected by any mutations within the central substrate binding site of SERT and NET and in the outer vestibule of NET, suggesting that citalopram and talopram bind to distinct sites on SERT and NET.
Together, these findings provide important insight into the molecular basis for SERT/NET selectivity of antidepressants, which can be used to guide rational development of unique transporter inhibitors with fine-tuned transporter selectivity.
</jats:p>
Enhanced 5-hydroxytryptamine-mediated behavioural responses in rats following repeated electroconvulsive shock: Relevance to the mechanism of the antidepressive effect of electroconvulsive therapy 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1979 Mar 22;61(2):167-70. doi: 10.1007/BF00426732.

Enhanced 5-hydroxytryptamine-mediated behavioural responses in rats following 
repeated electroconvulsive shock: relevance to the mechanism of the 
antidepressive effect of electroconvulsive therapy.

Costain DW
 Green AR, Grahame-Smith DG.
Treatment of rats with one electroconvulsive shock (ECS) per day for 10 days 
enhanced the hyperactivity syndrome produced by administration of 
tranylcypromine (10 mg kg-1) and L-tryptophan (50 mg kg-1) given 24 h after the 
final shock.
Similar enhancement was seen whether the shock was alternating 
sinusoidal or direct current (fractionated), whether it was given through 
unilaterally or bilaterally placed electrodes and whether or not a neuromuscular 
blocking agent (fazadinium) was used.
Five shocks spread over 10 days or 8 
shocks spread over 17 days were similarly effective, whilst 8 shocks in 1 day 
were ineffective.
Therefore when ECS are given to rats in ways similar to those 
in which electroconvulsive therapy is given to patients with depression, 
enhancement of behavioural responses to increased 5-HT function is produced.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00426732
PMID: 108733 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Socio-emotional correlates of a schooldog-teacher-team in the classroom 1. Front Psychol. 2013 Nov 27;4:886. doi: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00886. eCollection 
2013.

Socio-emotional correlates of a schooldog-teacher-team in the classroom.

Beetz A(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Education
 University of Erlangen-Nuremberg Erlangen, Germany.
A growing number of teachers in Europe regularly take their dogs with them into 
the classroom.
Limited research points at positive socio-emotional effects of 
this practice.
In this study the effects of a schooldog-teacher-team on 
socioemotional experiences in school, depression and emotion regulation 
strategies were investigated in a classroom of third-graders (male n = 12, 
female n = 13), which had a schooldog present for 1 day per week in comparison 
with a control class (male n = 11, female n = 10).
In contrast to the control 
class, the dog-class students reported a stronger improvement with regard to 
positive attitude toward school (repeated measures ANOVA; F = 10.769, df = 1, p 
= 0.002) and positive emotions related to learning (F = 4.479, df = 1, p = 
0.042) over the course of the year.
Since a prerequisite of all kinds of 
effective learning is a positive attitude and mood toward school and learning, 
the presence of a schooldog-teacher team thus has the potential to support 
learning.
DOI: 10.3389/fpsyg.2013.00886
PMCID: PMC3842092
PMID: 24348440
[Sympathetic regulation of adrenal medullary function during aging]. 1. Fiziol Zh (1978). 1990 Sep-Oct;36(5):94-9.

[Sympathetic regulation of adrenal medullary function during aging].

[Article in Russian]

Sato A(1).

Author information:
(1)Institute of Gerontology
 Tokyo, Japan.
Our recent studies on changes in sympathoadrenal medullary function with age in 
anesthetized Wistar rats were reviewed.
Although secretion rates of adrenaline 
and noradrenaline from the adrenal gland under resting conditions varied among 
animals, they gradually increased after 300 days and reached a level 2-4 times 
higher at 800-900 days compared with that of 100 days.
Spontaneous activity of a 
single sympathetic nerve fiber under resting conditions also increased during 
aging in a manner similar to the catecholamine secretion rates.
Reflex responses 
of mass activity of adrenal sympathetic nerve fibers to stimulation of 
baroreceptor and cutaneous mechanoreceptors were compared in young adult (4 
months old) and aged (26 months old) Wistar rats under strictly controlled 
conditions for anesthesia, respiration and body temperature.
Under these 
conditions the reflex depression in response to baroreceptor stimulation and 
cutaneous brushing as well as reflex excitation in response to cutaneous 
pinching were quite well maintained in the aged rats.
PMID: 2272396 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Responsivity to Offspring's Expression of Emotion Among Childhood-Onset Depressed Mothers 1. J Clin Child Adolesc Psychol. 2006 Dec;35(4):490-503. doi: 
10.1207/s15374424jccp3504_1.

Responsivity to offspring's expression of emotion among childhood-onset 
depressed mothers.

Shaw DS(1)
 Schonberg M, Sherrill J, Huffman D, Lukon J, Obrosky D, Kovacs M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Pittsburgh, Pittsburgh, PA 15260, 
USA.
casey@pitt.edu

This study examined responsivity of mothers with childhood-onset depression 
(COD) in relation to children's overt expression of positive and negative 
emotion.
It was hypothesized that COD and control mothers would differ in 
contingent responsivity to their children's expression of both positivity and 
different types of negative emotionality.
Using observations and maternal 
reports of their own emotional reactions, COD mothers were found to be less 
responsive to children's expression of distress.
A Gender x Group interaction 
was also found with respect to observed maternal responsiveness to child 
positivity, such that COD mothers were more responsive to girls' than boys' 
expression of positivity.
The results are discussed in reference to 
transactional models of early child psychopathology.
DOI: 10.1207/s15374424jccp3504_1
PMID: 17007595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Microglia activation is associated with IFN-α induced depressive-like behavior 1. Brain Behav Immun. 2016 Jul;55:105-113. doi: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.09.016. Epub 
2015 Sep 25.

Microglia activation is associated with IFN-α induced depressive-like behavior.

Wachholz S(1)
 Eßlinger M(2), Plümper J(3), Manitz MP(4), Juckel G(5), Friebe 
A(6).
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Psychoneuroimmunology, Department of Psychiatry, LWL-University 
Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
Electronic address: 
simonewachholz@aol.com.
(2)Laboratory of Psychoneuroimmunology, Department of Psychiatry, LWL-University 
Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
Electronic address: 
manuela.esslinger@rub.de.
(3)Laboratory of Psychoneuroimmunology, Department of Psychiatry, LWL-University 
Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
Electronic address: 
jennifer.pluemper@rub.de.
(4)Laboratory of Psychoneuroimmunology, Department of Psychiatry, LWL-University 
Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
Electronic address: 
marie-pierre.manitz@rub.de.
(5)Laboratory of Psychoneuroimmunology, Department of Psychiatry, LWL-University 
Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
Electronic address: 
georg.juckel@wkp-lwl.org.
(6)Laboratory of Psychoneuroimmunology, Department of Psychiatry, LWL-University 
Hospital, Ruhr University Bochum, Bochum, Germany.
Electronic address: 
astrid.friebe@rub.de.
Inflammatory immune activation has been frequently associated with the 
development of major depression.
This association was confirmed in patients 
receiving long-term treatment with pro-inflammatory interferon-α (IFN-α).
Microglia, the resident immune cells in the brain, might serve as an important 
interface in this immune system-to-brain communication.
The aim of the present 
study was to investigate the role of microglia in an IFN-α mouse model of 
immune-mediated depression.
Male BALB/c mice were treated with daily injections 
of IFN-α for two weeks.
Depressive-like behavior was analyzed in the forced swim 
and tail suspension test.
Activation of microglia was measured by flow 
cytometry.
Pro-inflammatory M1 type (MHC-II, CD40, CD54, CD80, CD86, CCR7), 
anti-inflammatory M2 type (CD206, CD200R), and maturation markers (CD11c, CCR7) 
were tested, as well as the chemokine receptor CCR2.
IFN-α led to a significant 
increase in depressive-like behavior and expression of the pro-inflammatory 
surface markers MHC-II, CD86, and CD54, indicating M1 polarization.
Because 
IFN-α-treated mice showed great individual variance in the behavioral response 
to IFN-α, they were further divided into vulnerable and non-vulnerable 
subgroups.
Only IFN-α vulnerable mice (characterized by their development of 
depressive-like behavior in response to IFN-α) showed an increased expression of 
MHC-II and CD86, while CD54 was similarly enhanced in both subgroups.
Thus, 
IFN-α-induced activation of microglia was specifically associated with 
depressive-like behavior.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbi.2015.09.016
PMID: 26408795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Lowered threshold for ventricular fibrillation in aniodarone-treated pigs undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic arrest with St. Thomas' cardioplegic solution 1. Eur J Cardiothorac Surg. 1993;7(4):186-92. doi: 10.1016/1010-7940(93)90157-7.

Lowered threshold for ventricular fibrillation in amiodarone-treated pigs 
undergoing cardiopulmonary bypass and cardioplegic arrest with St. Thomas' 
cardioplegic solution.

Gøtzsche LS(1)
 Pedersen EM, Paulsen PK.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Experimental Clinical Research, Skejby University Hospital, 
Arhus, Denmark.
The antiarrhythmic agent amiodarone has been suspected of causing reduced 
cardiac performance after extracorporeal circulation and cardioplegic arrest in 
patients.
This has recently been confirmed in an experimental model where pigs 
were exposed to cardiopulmonary bypass and cold cardioplegic arrest with 
Bretschneider's solution.
Due to the high concentration of the cardio-depressant 
agent procain in Bretschneider's solution, it could be speculated whether it is 
the combination of amiodarone and this solution that may be potentially 
deleterious, rather than amiodarone alone.
To investigate this, adult pigs (75 
+/- 2 kg at surgery) were treated with amiodarone for 30 +/- 2 days (1400 
mg/day: n = 8, untreated controls: n = 4, blind experiment), followed by 
exposure to cardiopulmonary bypass with universal cooling to 28 degrees C and 
topical cold cardioplegic arrest with St. Thomas' solution for 60 min.
Apart 
from 1 g of calcium (Ca2+) at the end of bypass, no inotropic drugs were 
administered.
Cardiac reserve was tested by right ventricular pacing (200 
beats/min until death or up to 30 min).
The two groups did not differ concerning 
preload or afterload, heart rate, cardiac output, left ventricular pressure, 
arterial pressure or rate of change in left ventricular relaxation (-dP/dt) 
before or after bypass was terminated, while the rate of change in left 
ventricular contraction (+dP/dt) was lower in the amiodarone-treated pigs.
The 
time on bypass, before stable hemodynamics had recovered, was prolonged in 
amiodarone-treated animals, 46 +/- 4 min versus 31 +/- 3 min in the controls (P 
< 0.05).
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/1010-7940(93)90157-7
PMID: 8481255 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Heterosynaptic facilitation of tail sensory neuron synaptic transmission during habituation in tail-induced tail and siphon withdrawal reflexes of Aplysia. 1. J Neurosci. 1996 Aug 15;16(16):4933-48. doi:
10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-16-04933.1996.

Heterosynaptic facilitation of tail sensory neuron synaptic transmission during 
habituation in tail-induced tail and siphon withdrawal reflexes of Aplysia.

Stopfer M(1)
 Carew TJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Yale University, New Haven, Connecticut 06520-8205, 
USA.
In cellular studies of habituation, such as in the gill and siphon withdrawal 
reflex to tactile stimulation of the siphon of Aplysia, a mechanism that has 
emerged as an explanation for response decrement during habituation is 
homosynaptic depression at sensory neurons mediating the behavioral response.
We 
have examined the contribution of homosynaptic depression to habituation in 
sensory neurons that contribute to two reflex behaviors in Aplysia, tail 
withdrawal and siphon withdrawal, both elicited by threshold-level tail 
stimulation.
In a companion paper (this issue), we reported that repeated tail 
stimulation, identical to that producing habituation in siphon withdrawal in 
freely moving animals, also produces habituation in reduced preparations.
In 
this paper, we extend these behavioral findings by showing that in reduced 
preparations, identical tail stimulation also produces habituation of the tail 
withdrawal reflex.
In addition, our cellular experiments show that (1) 
identified sensory and motor neurons in both reflex systems respond to identical 
repeated tail stimulation; in sensory neurons it produces a progressive decrease 
in spike number and increase in spike latency, and in motor neurons it produces 
progressive decrement in complex EPSPs and spike output.
(2) Homosynaptic 
depression of the tail sensory neuron to tail motor neuron synapse does occur 
when the sensory neurons are activated repetitively by intracellular current.
(3) Homosynaptic depression at this synapse does not occur when the sensory 
neurons are activated repetitively by threshold-level tail stimuli that elicit 
the behavioral reflex and cause habituation; rather, the sensory neurons exhibit 
significant heterosynaptic facilitation.
Thus, in these reflexes, habituation is 
not accompanied by homosynaptic depression at the sensory neurons, suggesting 
that the plasticity underlying habituation occurs primarily at interneuronal 
sites.
DOI: 10.1523/JNEUROSCI.16-16-04933.1996
PMCID: PMC6579301
PMID: 8756425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Renal α2-adrenoceptor blockade decreases sodium and water excretion in the anesthetized rat 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1988 Sep 13;154(2):117-24. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(88)90088-x.

Renal alpha 2-adrenoceptor blockade decreases sodium and water excretion in the 
anesthetized rat.

Blandford DE(1)
 Smyth DD.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, University of Manitoba, Winnipeg, Canada.
The reported effects of renal alpha 2-adrenoceptor blockade on sodium and water 
excretion have been inconsistent.
We therefore studied the effect of an 
intrarenal infusion of an alpha 2-adrenoceptor antagonist in rats undergoing two 
distinct levels of diuresis and natriuresis.
Renal excretion of sodium and water 
was studied in anesthetized rats that had been unilaterally nephrectomized 
(right kidney) 10 days prior to the experimental day.
In the presence of the 
lower rate of saline infusion an intrarenal infusion of the alpha 2-adrenoceptor 
antagonist, yohimbine, (25.6 nmol/kg per min) resulted in no change in urine 
volume or sodium and potassium excretion.
In the presence of the modest 
diuresis, due to the higher level of saline infusion, intrarenal yohimbine 
resulted in a decrease in urine volume, sodium excretion and free water 
clearance.
These effects of yohimbine were not found in adrenalectomized rats.
The ability to demonstrate an effect of renal alpha 2-adrenoceptor blockade was 
dependent on the baseline level of sodium and water excretion.
These results 
suggest that renal alpha 2-adrenoceptors may mediate the inhibition of the renal 
action of vasopressin by adrenal catecholamines.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(88)90088-x
PMID: 2906609 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Sustained Running in Rats Administered Corticosterone Prevents the Development of Depressive Behaviors and Enhances Hippocampal Neurogenesis and Synaptic Plasticity without Increasing Neurotrophic Factor Levels <jats:p> We have previously shown that voluntary running acts as an anxiolytic and ameliorates deficits in hippocampal neurogenesis and spatial learning. It also reduces depression-like behaviors that are normally observed in rats that were administered either low (30 mg/kg) or moderate (40 mg/kg) doses of corticosterone (CORT). However
 the protective effects of running were absent in rats treated with a high (50 mg/kg) dose of CORT.
We examined whether allowing animals to exercise for 2 weeks prior and/or concurrently with the administration of 50 mg/kg CORT treatment could have similar protective effects.
We examined hippocampal neurogenesis using immuno-histochemical staining of proliferative and survival cells with the thymidine analogs (BrdU, CIdU, and IdU).
In addition, we monitored synaptic protein expression and quantified the levels of neurotrophic factors in these animals as well as performing behavioral analyses (forced swim test and sucrose preference test).
Our results indicate that the depressive phenotype and reductions in neurogenesis that normally accompany high CORT administration could only be prevented by allowing animals to exercise both prior to and concurrently with the CORT administration period.
These animals also showed increases in both synaptophysin and PSD-95 protein levels, but surprisingly, neither brain-derived neurotrophic factor (BDNF) nor insulin-like growth factor 1 (IGF-1) levels were increased in these animals.
The results suggest that persistent exercise can strengthen resilience to stress by promoting hippocampal neurogenesis and increasing synaptic protein levels, thereby reducing the deleterious effects of stress.
</jats:p>
Purinergic modulation in the brain of the spiny lobster 1. Brain Res. 1987 Sep 22;421(1-2):57-64. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(87)91274-1.

Purinergic modulation in the brain of the spiny lobster.

Derby CD(1)
 Ache BW, Carr WE.
Author information:
(1)Department of Biology, Georgia State University, Atlanta 30303.
Earlier studies identified purinergic chemoreceptors in the olfactory organ of 
the spiny lobster, Panulirus argus.
In this study, electrophysiological 
experiments demonstrate that purinergic substances can modulate both the 
spontaneous activity and the evoked responses of neurons within the brain of 
this animal.
Perfusion of the brain with 100 microM adenosine 5'-monophosphate 
(AMP) modulated the spontaneous activity of 71% of the brain interneurons that 
were monitored.
AMP also modulated the electrically or chemically evoked 
activity of 25% of the monitored interneurons.
The effects were dose-dependent 
(down to 1 microM) and reversible.
The modulatory effects of adenosine were 
similar to those of AMP, and were antagonized by the adenosine receptor 
antagonist 1,3-dipropyl-8-p-sulfophenylxanthine.
The modulation by AMP or 
adenosine was depressive in most but not all neurons, as is the case with 
purinergic effects in the brain of vertebrates.
We believe this is the first 
demonstration of modulatory effects of purinergic substances in the nervous 
system of any invertebrate.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(87)91274-1
PMID: 3690285 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Interaction of RO 15-4513 and ethanol on the behaviour of mice: antagonistic or additive effects? 1. Psychopharmacology (Berl). 1988;94(3):392-6. doi: 10.1007/BF00174695.

Interaction of RO 15-4513 and ethanol on the behaviour of mice: antagonistic or 
additive effects?

Misslin R(1)
 Belzung C, Vogel E.

Author information:
(1)Laboratoire de Psychophysiologie, Strasbourg, France.
Opposite effects were observed of ethanol on the behaviour of mice in the two 
chambered light/dark test.
At a low dose, it had anxiogenic effects, while it 
produced anxiolytic effects at a higher dose.
Selective antagonistic actions of 
RO 15-4513 against the behavioural effects of ethanol have been reported by 
others without intrinsic actions.
In contrast, we found intrinsic depressive 
properties of RO 15-4513.
This drug reduced locomotion in a running wheel test.
We suggest that RO 15-4513 reversed certain effects of ethanol in an additive, 
rather than interactive, manner.
In addition, RO 15-4513 did not block the 
sedation produced by a high dose of ethanol.
Since RO 15-4513 revealed 
proconvulsant properties, it is proposed that the depressive effects of this 
drug could be related to its proconvulsive activity.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00174695
PMID: 3128816 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
THIP
 a Hypnotic and Antinociceptive Drug, Enhances an Extrasynaptic GABAA Receptor-mediated Conductance in Mouse Neocortex 1.
Cereb Cortex.
2006 Aug;16(8):1134-41. doi: 10.1093/cercor/bhj055.
Epub 2005
Oct  12.
THIP, a hypnotic and antinociceptive drug, enhances an extrasynaptic GABAA 
receptor-mediated conductance in mouse neocortex.
Drasbek KR(1), Jensen K.

Author information:
(1)Synaptic Physiology Laboratory, Institute of Physiology and Biophysics, 
University of Aarhus, DK-8000 Aarhus C, Denmark.
THIP (4,5,6,7-tetrahydroisoxazolo[5,4-c]pyridin-3-ol) is a selective GABA(A) 
receptor agonist with a preference for delta-subunit containing GABA(A) 
receptors.
THIP is currently being tested in human trials for its hypnotic 
effects, displaying advantageous tolerance and addiction properties.
Since its 
cellular actions in the neocortex are uncertain, we studied the effects of THIP 
on neurons in slices of frontoparietal neocortex of 13- to 19-day-old (P13-19) 
mice.
Using whole-cell patch-clamp recordings, we found that the clinically 
relevant THIP concentration of 1 muM induced a robust tonic GABA(A)-mediated 
current in layer 2/3 neurons.
In comparison, only a minute tonic current was 
induced by mimicking in vivo endogenous GABA levels.
Miniature IPSCs were not 
affected by 1 muM THIP suggesting an extrasynaptic site of action.
The EC(50) 
for THIP was 44 muM.
In accordance with the stronger expression of 
delta-containing receptors in superficial neocortical layers, THIP induced a 44% 
larger tonic current in layer 2/3 than in layer 5 neurons.
Finally, monitoring 
spontaneously active neocortical neurons, THIP caused an overall depression of 
inhibitory activity, while enhancing excitatory activity prominently.
Our 
studies suggest that THIP activates an extrasynaptic GABA(A) receptor-mediated 
conductance in the neocortex, which may alter the cortical network activity.
DOI: 10.1093/cercor/bhj055
PMID: 16221925 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Triiodothyronine potentiation of antidepressant-induced reversal of learned helplessness in rats 1. Psychiatry Res. 1987 Jul;21(3):267-75. doi: 10.1016/0165-1781(87)90031-x.

Triiodothyronine potentiation of antidepressant-induced reversal of learned 
helplessness in rats.

Brochet DM
 Martin P, Soubrié P, Simon P.

Several clinical investigations have suggested that a special relationship 
exists between thyroid function and affective disorders and/or therapeutic 
response to antidepressants.
The present report describes that the reversal by 
antidepressants (imipramine, desipramine, and nomifensine) of depressive-like 
behavior in rats (escape deficits produced by previous exposure to 
uncontrollable stress) was significantly hastened in animals given daily 
triiodothyronine (T3).
The learned helplessness paradigm might be a useful model 
for approaching in animals the neurohormonal correlates of affective disorders 
and the neurobiochemical bases of the reported T3 enhancement of 
antidepressants.
DOI: 10.1016/0165-1781(87)90031-x
PMID: 3628611 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mercury Inhibition of Neutrophil Activity: Evidence of Aberrant Cellular Signalling and Incoherent Cellular Metabolism <jats:p>Exposure to environmental heavy metals has been reported to affect the immune system. Here
 we tested the hypothesis that Hg<jats:sup>+2</jats:sup>, acting through membrane proteins, disrupts metabolic dynamics and downstream cell functions in human neutrophils.
We found that HgCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> inhibited: (1) polarization and (2) immunoglobulin (Ig)G‐mediated phagocytosis of sheep erythrocytes in a dose‐dependent manner from 2.5 to 10 µ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>.
Because these activities have been linked with pro‐inflammatory signalling, we also studied the effects of HgCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> on intracellular signalling by measuring protein tyrosine phosphorylation.
HgCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> at doses = 1 µ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc> increased tyrosine phosphorylation.
We also studied the effect of HgCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> on neutrophil metabolism by measuring NAD(P)H autofluorescence as an indicator of intracellular NAD(P)H concentration.
After HgCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> treatment, we found that normal sinusoidal NAD(P)H oscillations became incoherent.
We recently reported that the NAD(P)H oscillation frequency is affected by cell migration and activation, which can in turn be regulated by integrin‐mediated signalling.
Therefore, we examined the effects of HgCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> on cell surface distribution of membrane proteins.
After exposure to environmentally relevant concentrations of HgCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> we found that CR3, but not other membrane proteins (e.g.
uPAR, FcγRIIA and the formyl peptide receptor), became clustered on cell surfaces.
We suggest that HgCl<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> disrupts integrin signalling/functional pathways in neutrophils.</jats:p>
Anti-Fertility Effect of Non-Steroidal Anti-Inflammatory Drugs 1. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1978 Dec;28(6):909-17. doi: 10.1254/jjp.28.909.

Anti-fertility effect of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs.

Yegnanarayan R
 Joglekar GV.
The anti-fertility activity of prostaglandin synthesis inhibitors namely the 
non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs: acetyl salicylic acid, indomethacin and 
oxyphenbutazone were investigated in male and female albino rats and female 
albino rabbits.
Oxyphenbutazone and indomethacin affected the reproductive 
process in male rats.
Indomethacin 3 mg/kg.
and acetyl salicylic acid 300 mg/kg 
produced significant anti-ovulatory activity in the rabbit.
In female rats, all 
three drugs given in high doses over a period of two oestrous cycles reduced 
mating significantly, while only indomethacin given in a low dose of 0.8 mg/kg 
over a period of six oestrous cycles could reduce mating significantly.
Anti-implantation activity was seen with indomethacin 4 mg/kg.
alone, and though 
post-implantation activity was seen with all three drugs, it was associated with 
maternal deaths.
It appears that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs affect 
reproduction in female animals.
DOI: 10.1254/jjp.28.909
PMID: 745313 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Comparison of the potency of glycosylated and nonglycosylated recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating factors in neutropenic and nonneutropenic CD rats 1. Cancer Chemother Pharmacol. 1997;39(3):259-66. doi: 10.1007/s002800050570.

Comparison of the potency of glycosylated and nonglycosylated recombinant human 
granulocyte colony-stimulating factors in neutropenic and nonneutropenic CD 
rats.

Nohynek GJ(1)
 Plard JP, Wells MY, Zerial A, Roquet F.

Author information:
(1)Drug Safety Department, Centre de Recherche de Vitry-Alfortville, 
Vitry-sur-Seine, France.
Recent studies in human bone-marrow culture and healthy human volunteers suggest 
that lenograstim [glycosylated, recombinant human granulocyte colony-stimulating 
factor (rHuG-CSF) produced in Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) cells] has greater in 
vivo potency than filgrastim [nonglycosylated, methionine-extended recombinant 
human granulocyte colony-stimulating factor (rmetHuG-CSF) produced in 
Escherichia coli].
To confirm and extend these results we investigated the in 
vivo potency of both products in normal rats and neutropenic CD rats as an 
animal model of chemotherapy-induced neutropenia.
In normal rats, groups of 
eight normal male CD rats received four subcutaneous doses of 10, 30, or 100 
micrograms/kg filgrastim or lenograstim on days 1-4 of the study, whereas a 
control group received the vehicle.
Blood samples were collected from each 
animal before treatment (day -5) and on days 2, 3, 5, 8, and 12 of the study for 
determination of red blood cell (RBC), platelet, white blood cell (WBC), and 
differential counts.
rHuG-CSF and r-metHuG-CSF produced increased WBC counts, 
principally due to elevated absolute neutrophil counts (ANCs); on days 2, 3, and 
5, all groups receiving rG-CSF had ANCs that increased in a progressive and 
dose-related manner.
With the exception of a single value, mean ANCs obtained on 
days 2, 3, and 5 in lenograstim-treated groups were higher (statistically 
significant on day 3 at 30 and 100 micrograms/kg and on day 5 at 10, 30, and 100 
micrograms/kg) than the respective values obtained in filgrastim-treated groups.
No compound-related effect was noted in RBC or platelet parameters.
Neutropenia 
was induced in male CD rats (12 animals/group) with a single intraperitoneal 
dose of 50 mg/kg cyclophosphamide (CPA) on day 0.
On days 1-4, CPA-treated 
groups were treated with the vehicle (control) or with filgrastim or lenograstim 
at 30 or 100 micrograms/kg per day.
An additional group was not treated with CPA 
and served as the absolute control group.
Blood was collected from alternating 
subgroups on study day -5 (pretest) and on days 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 8, 9, and 12 for 
determination of RBC, platelet, WBC, and differential counts.
No major adverse 
in-life effect was noted in neutropenic rats.
Maximal depression of WBCs and 
ANCs occurred on day 5, followed by recovery to normal values by days 9 (ANC) 
and 12 (WBC).
On day 3 and days 5-9, rHuG-CSF- and metHuG-CSF-treated groups had 
marked and dose-related increases in WBCs as compared with CPA-treated controls, 
principally due to elevated ANCs.
With the exception of a few values, mean ANC 
values obtained in lenograstim-treated groups were consistently higher than the 
respective values obtained in filgrastim-treated groups; the difference was 
statistically significant on day 3 (30-microgram/kg groups) and on days 6 and 8 
(100-microgram/kg groups).
In conclusion, treatment of normal and neutropenic CD 
rats with lenograstim resulted in a dose-related elevation of ANCs that was 
consistently and significantly higher than the response to identical doses of 
filgrastim.
These results suggest that lenograstim, the glycosylated form of 
rG-CSF, has superior in vivo potency in normal and neutropenic animals as 
compared with filgrastim, the nonglycosylated form of rG-CSF.
DOI: 10.1007/s002800050570
PMID: 8996530 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selective 5‐HT<sub>1B</sub> receptor inhibition of glutamatergic and GABAergic synaptic activity in the rat dorsal and median raphe <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The dorsal (DR) and median (MR) raphe nuclei contain 5‐hydroxytryptamine (5‐HT) cell bodies that give rise to the majority of the ascending 5‐HT projections to the forebrain. The DR and MR have differential roles in mediating stress
 anxiety and depression.
Glutamate and GABA activity sculpt putative 5‐HT neuronal firing and 5‐HT release in a seemingly differential manner in the MR and DR, yet isolated glutamate and GABA activity within the DR and MR has not been systematically characterized.
Visualized whole‐cell voltage‐clamp techniques were used to record excitatory and inhibitory postsynaptic currents (EPSC and IPSC) in 5‐HT‐containing neurons.
There was a regional variation in action potential‐dependent (spontaneous) and basal [miniature (m)] glutamate and GABAergic activity.
mEPSC activity was greater than mIPSC activity in the DR, whereas in the MR the mIPSC activity was greater.
These differences in EPSC and IPSC frequency indicate that glutamatergic and GABAergic input have distinct cytoarchitectures in the DR and MR. 5‐HT<jats:sub>1B</jats:sub> receptor activation decreased mEPSC frequency in the DR and the MR, but selectively inhibited mIPSC activity only in the MR.
This finding, in concert with its previously described function as an autoreceptor, suggests that 5‐HT<jats:sub>1B</jats:sub> receptors influence the ascending 5‐HT system through multiple mechanisms.
The disparity in organization and integration of glutamatergic and GABAergic input to DR and MR neurons and their regulation by 5‐HT<jats:sub>1B</jats:sub> receptors may contribute to the distinction in MR and DR regulation of forebrain regions and their differential function in the aetiology and pharmacological treatment of psychiatric disease states.</jats:p>
Physiologic Study of Bile Salt and Lipid Secretion in Rats After Liver Transplantation 1. Ann Surg. 1993 Apr;217(4):404-12. doi: 10.1097/00000658-199304000-00013.

Physiologic study of bile salt and lipid secretion in rats after liver 
transplantation.

Xu HS(1)
 Pilcher JA, Jones RS.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Virginia Health Sciences Center, 
Charlottesville.
OBJECTIVE: This experiment determined the effects of liver transplantation on 
bile salt kinetics and biliary lipid secretion.
SUMMARY BACKGROUND DATA: Depression of bile secretion in the three main 
components and bile cholesterol supersaturation with a high incidence of 
cholesterol stone formation have been documented in patients with end stage 
liver diseases after transplantation.
However, physiologic changes of bile salt 
and lipid secretion in recipients remain unclear.
METHODS: The study was done using a rat liver transplant model with 1 and 6 
hours of donor liver cold preservation in saline.
A chronic common bile duct 
fistula and a duodenal cannula were established for bile collection and the 
sample biochemical study for 6 days.
RESULTS: Altered bile salt kinetics in liver grafted rats included depressed 
bile flow for 1-3 hours after the revascularization, decreased bile salt 
concentration and outputs, reduced bile salt basal synthesis rate, and reduced 
bile salt pool size during the early postoperative period.
Phospholipid 
concentration and secretion rate depressed for 1-3 days without altered 
cholesterol level.
The uncoupling change of the cholesterol and the other bile 
components resulted in an increased lithogenic indices in bile on days 2 and 3.
CONCLUSION: Alterations of bile composition and bile salt kinetics occur in 
liver transplanted rats.
The changes may result from injuries of the liver 
microcirculation and parenchymal cells caused by cold preservation.
The study of 
bile secretion is helpful for evaluation of the initial graft function.
The 
changed ratio of three bile components may be important for cholesterol stone 
formation in the liver transplant recipient.
DOI: 10.1097/00000658-199304000-00013
PMCID: PMC1242808
PMID: 8466312 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Clozapine markedly elevates pregnenolone in rat hippocampus
 cerebral cortex, and serum: Candidate mechanism for superior efficacy?
1.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav.
2006 Aug;84(4):598-608. doi:
10.1016/j.pbb.2006.07.026.
Epub 2006 Sep 8.
Clozapine markedly elevates pregnenolone in rat hippocampus, cerebral cortex, 
and serum: candidate mechanism for superior efficacy?
Marx CE(1), Shampine LJ, Duncan GE, VanDoren MJ, Grobin AC, Massing MW, Madison 
RD, Bradford DW, Butterfield MI, Lieberman JA, Morrow AL.
Author information:
(1)Duke University Medical Center, Durham NC, USA.
marx0001@mc.duke.edu

Clozapine demonstrates superior efficacy in patients with schizophrenia, but the 
precise mechanisms contributing to this clinical advantage are not clear.
Clozapine and olanzapine increase the GABAergic neuroactive steroid (NS) 
allopregnanolone, and it has been hypothesized that NS induction may contribute 
to the therapeutic actions of these agents.
Pregnenolone administration improves 
learning and memory in rodent models, and decreases in this NS have been 
associated with depressive symptoms in humans.
These pregnenolone 
characteristics may be relevant to the actions of antipsychotics.
We therefore 
investigated potential pregnenolone alterations in rat hippocampus and cerebral 
cortex following clozapine, olanzapine, and other second generation agents as a 
candidate NS mechanism contributing to antipsychotic efficacy.
In the first set 
of experiments, intact, adrenalectomized, and sham-operated male rats received 
vehicle or clozapine (20 mg/kg) IP.
In the second set, male rats received 
vehicle, olanzapine (5 mg/kg), quetiapine (20 mg/kg), ziprasidone (10 mg/kg) or 
aripiprazole (5 mg/kg) IP.
Pregnenolone levels were determined by gas 
chromatography/mass spectrometry.
Clozapine markedly elevates pregnenolone in 
rat hippocampus, cerebral cortex, and serum; hippocampal levels were strongly 
correlated with serum levels (r=0.987).
Olanzapine also elevates pregnenolone 
levels, but to a lesser degree than clozapine.
Pregnenolone induction may 
contribute to the clinical actions of clozapine and olanzapine.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2006.07.026
PMID: 16962649 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fluoxetine inhibition of glycine receptor activity in rat hippocampal neurons 1. Brain Res. 2008 Nov 6;1239:77-84. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.055. Epub
2008  Aug 29.

Fluoxetine inhibition of glycine receptor activity in rat hippocampal neurons.

Ye ZY(1)
 Lu YG, Sun H, Cheng XP, Xu TL, Zhou JN.
Author information:
(1)Hefei National Laboratory for Physical Sciences at Microscale and Department 
of Neurobiology and Biophysics, School of Life Sciences, University of Science 
and Technology of China, Hefei, Anhui 230027, China.
zyye@mail.ustc.edu.cn

Fluoxetine is a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor widely used for treating 
depression.
However, fluoxetine treatment may lead to seizures at higher doses, 
which underlying mechanism remains largely unknown.
In this study, we examined 
the effects of fluoxetine on glycine receptor (GlyR) activity.
Using the 
whole-cell patch-clamp recording method, we found that fluoxetine and its 
metabolite norfluoxetine inhibited glycine-induced currents in cultured rat 
hippocampal neurons.
This inhibition was dose-dependent, and 
voltage-independent.
Fluoxetine shifted the glycine concentration-response curve 
to the right without altering the maximal current.
Both Lineweaver-Burk and 
Schild plots suggest competitive inhibition.
The amount of fluoxetine inhibition 
significantly increased when homomeric GlyRs were selectively inhibited with 
picrotoxin.
Moreover, fluoxetine inhibited the current mediated by heteromeric 
alpha2beta- but not homomeric alpha2-GlyRs transiently expressed in HEK293T 
cells.
These results suggest that fluoxetine is a competitive and 
subtype-selective GlyR inhibitor, which may explain its capacity to induce 
seizures.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2008.08.055
PMID: 18786514 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of penetration enhancers on skin permeation of trazodone hydrochloride from matrix type transdermal formulation through mouse and human cadaver epidermis. 1. Acta Pol Pharm. 2006 Nov-Dec;63(6):535-41.

Effect of penetration enhancers on skin permeation of trazodone hydrochloride 
from matrix type transdermal formulation through mouse and human cadaver 
epidermis.

Das MK(1)
 Bhattacharya A, Ghosal SK.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmaceutical Sciences, Dibrugarh University, 
Dibrugarh-786004, India.
du_mkd@yahoo.co.in

Erratum in
    Acta Pol Pharm.
2007 May-Jun;64(3):284.
A transdermal dosage form of trazodone hydrochloride (TZN) may be useful in the 
treatment of moderate to severe depression in schizophrenic patients by 
providing prolonged duration of action.
It will also improve patient compliance 
and bioavailability.
Controlled input of TZN would attenuate fluctuating plasma 
level of TZN resulting from oral therapy.
The aim of the current investigation 
was to evaluate its flux and the effects of various penetration enhancers, viz., 
isopropyl myristate (IPM), isopropyl palmitate (IPP), butanol and octanol on 
transdermal permeation from matrix-based formulations through the skin.
The 
enhancing effect on the permeation of TZN was determined using the mouse and 
human cadaver epidermis.
In vitro permeation data were collected at 37 degrees C 
using Keshary-Chien diffusion cells.
The skin permeation was then evaluated by 
measuring the steady state permeation flux of TZN, enhancement ratio and the 
diffusion parameter.
The highest enhancing effect was obtained with IPM followed 
by butanol, octanol and IPP.
In general, higher fluxes were observed through 
mouse epidermis as compared with the human cadaver epidermis.
The skin retention 
of TZN for both the species in the presence of different enhancers was nearly 3 
times higher than for the control formulation.
Based on the observed results, a 
transdermal patch of about 70 cm2 consisting of 10 % IPM should be able to 
attain and maintain therapeutic plasma concentration of TZN at 0.75 mg/mL over a 
period of 24 h.

PMID: 17438871 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Protective Effect of Ifenprodil Against Spreading Depression in the Mouse Entorhinal Cortex <jats:p> In the brain
 spreading depression (SD) is characterized by a large extracellular DC shift, a massive failure of ion homeostasis and a transient cessation of neuronal function.
Clinically, SD is believed to be involved in various neurological disorders including migraine and cerebrovascular diseases.
The propagation of cortical SD requires the release of glutamate, and N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptors play a crucial role in this process.
Here, we have isolated the NMDA receptor-mediated component of extracellularly recorded field excitatory postsynaptic potentials (fEPSPs) in layers 2–3 of the entorhinal cortex of murine brain slices.
In the absence of GABA<jats:sub>A</jats:sub> and AMPA receptor-mediated synaptic transmission, stimulation of layer 6 afferents every 15–90 s elicited spontaneous SD on average within 18.5 min after the start of the stimulation.
In the presence of ifenprodil, an NR2B receptor subunit-selective NMDA receptor antagonist, the occurrence of SD was nearly abolished.
Our results are consistent with an important role of NR2B subunits in triggering SD in the entorhinal cortex.
</jats:p>
Computational modeling of spike generation in serotonergic neurons of the dorsal raphe nucleus 1. Prog Neurobiol. 2014 Jul;118:59-101. doi: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2014.04.001.
Epub  2014 Apr 29.

Computational modeling of spike generation in serotonergic neurons of the dorsal 
raphe nucleus.

Tuckwell HC(1)
 Penington NJ(2).
Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute for Mathematics in the Sciences, Inselstr.
22, 04103 
Leipzig, Germany; School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, University of 
Adelaide, Adelaide, South Australia 5005, Australia.
Electronic address: 
Henry.Tuckwell@Adelaide.edu.au.
(2)Department of Physiology and Pharmacology, State University of New York, 
Downstate Medical Center, Box 29, 450 Clarkson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203-2098, 
USA; Program in Neural and Behavioral Science and Robert F. Furchgott Center for 
Neural and Behavioral Science, State University of New York, Downstate Medical 
Center, Box 29, 450 Clarkson Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11203-2098, USA.
Serotonergic neurons of the dorsal raphe nucleus, with their extensive 
innervation of limbic and higher brain regions and interactions with the 
endocrine system have important modulatory or regulatory effects on many 
cognitive, emotional and physiological processes.
They have been strongly 
implicated in responses to stress and in the occurrence of major depressive 
disorder and other psychiatric disorders.
In order to quantify some of these 
effects, detailed mathematical models of the activity of such cells are required 
which describe their complex neurochemistry and neurophysiology.
We consider 
here a single-compartment model of these neurons which is capable of describing 
many of the known features of spike generation, particularly the slow rhythmic 
pacemaking activity often observed in these cells in a variety of species.
Included in the model are 11 kinds of ion channels: a fast sodium current INa, a 
delayed rectifier potassium current IKDR, a transient potassium current IA, a 
slow non-inactivating potassium current IM, a low-threshold calcium current IT, 
two high threshold calcium currents IL and IN, small and large conductance 
potassium currents ISK and IBK, a hyperpolarization-activated cation current IH 
and a leak current ILeak.
In Sections 3-8, each current type is considered in 
detail and parameters estimated from voltage clamp data where possible.
Three 
kinds of model are considered for the BK current and two for the leak current.
Intracellular calcium ion concentration Cai is an additional component and 
calcium dynamics along with buffering and pumping is discussed in Section 9.
The 
remainder of the article contains descriptions of computed solutions which 
reveal both spontaneous and driven spiking with several parameter sets.
Attention is focused on the properties usually associated with these neurons, 
particularly long duration of action potential, steep upslope on the leading 
edge of spikes, pacemaker-like spiking, long-lasting afterhyperpolarization and 
the ramp-like return to threshold after a spike.
In some cases the membrane 
potential trajectories display doublets or have humps or notches as have been 
reported in some experimental studies.
The computed time courses of IA and IT 
during the interspike interval support the generally held view of a competition 
between them in influencing the frequency of spiking.
Spontaneous activity was 
facilitated by the presence of IH which has been found in these neurons by some 
investigators.
For reasonable sets of parameters spike frequencies between about 
0.6Hz and 1.2Hz are obtained, but frequencies as high as 6Hz could be obtained 
with special parameter choices.
Topics investigated and compared with experiment 
include shoulders, notches, anodal break phenomena, the effects of noradrenergic 
input, frequency versus current curves, depolarization block, effects of cell 
size and the effects of IM.
The inhibitory effects of activating 5-HT1A 
autoreceptors are also investigated.
There is a considerable discussion of in 
vitro versus in vivo firing behavior, with focus on the roles of noradrenergic 
input, corticotropin-releasing factor and orexinergic inputs.
Location of cells 
within the nucleus is probably a major factor, along with the state of the 
animal.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pneurobio.2014.04.001
PMID: 24784445 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Dopamine Inhibits Two Characterized Voltage-Dependent Calcium Currents in Identified Rat Lactotroph Cells 1. Endocrinology. 1990 Sep;127(3):990-1001. doi: 10.1210/endo-127-3-990.

Dopamine inhibits two characterized voltage-dependent calcium currents in 
identified rat lactotroph cells.

Lledo PM(1)
 Legendre P, Israel JM, Vincent JD.
Author information:
(1)INSERM U.176, 33077 Bordeaux, France.
The effects of dopamine (DA) on voltage-dependent Ca2+ currents were 
investigated in cultured rat lactotroph cells using the patch clamp recording 
technique.
Each recorded cell was identified by the reverse hemolytic plaque 
assay.
In the whole-cell configuration, two types of Ca2+ currents, L and T, 
were characterized on the basis of their kinetics, voltage sensitivity, and 
pharmacology.
The L component had a threshold of -25 mV, showed little 
inactivation during a 150-msec voltage step, and was maximal at +10 mV.
Cadmium 
ions (100 microM) significantly reduced its amplitude (75%).
The T component was 
activated at a membrane potential close to -50 mV, was maximal at -10 mV, and 
showed a voltage-dependent inactivation between -90 and -30 mV.
It was quickly 
inactivated during a maintained depolarization (time constant, 27 ms at -30 mV) 
and was strongly reduced (80%) by nickel ions (100 microM).
Bath application of 
DA (10 nM) caused a markedly general depression of inward Ca2+ currents, acting 
differently on the T- and L-type currents.
DA application shifted the 
voltage-dependence of the L-type current activation toward depolarization values 
(8 mV) without modifying its time- and voltage-dependent inactivation.
In 
contrast, DA enhanced the inactivation of the T-type current by accelerating its 
time-dependent inactivation (25% decrease in the time constant of inactivation) 
and by shifting the voltage-dependence of the T-type current inactivation toward 
hyperpolarizing values (-63 mV in control vs. -77 mV in the presence of DA).
These effects of DA were dose-dependent and involved the activation of a D2 
receptor type.
They were mimicked by bromocriptine application (10 nM), whereas 
sulpiride (100 nM) blocked the DA-evoked response.
The D1 antagonist SCH 23390 
was ineffective up to 100 microM.
All of these DA-induced modifications in Ca2+ 
currents were abolished using a GTP-free pipette solution or after pretreatment 
of cells with pertussis toxin, suggesting that DA can regulate the function of 
Ca2+ channels through GTP-binding proteins (G-proteins).
Our results show that 
DA acts simultaneously by reducing both voltage-dependent Ca2+ currents on 
lactotroph cells.
Thus, DA reduces the entry of Ca2+ ions across the surface 
membrane and thereby influences electrical activity and the cytosolic free Ca2+ 
concentration involved in both basal and evoked PRL release.
DOI: 10.1210/endo-127-3-990
PMID: 2167220 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pentobarbitone modulation of NMDA receptors in neurones isolated from the rat olfactory brain <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The action of pentobarbitone on the N‐methyl‐D‐aspartate (NMDA) receptors of neurones freshly dissociated from the olfactory bulb and olfactory tubercle has been studied using patch‐clamp techniques.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Pentobarbitone produced a concentration‐dependent depression of the currents evoked by NMDA with an IC<jats:sub>50</jats:sub> value of c. 250 μm.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Analysis of the NMDA‐evoked noise produced power spectra that could be fitted by the sum of two Lorentzians with comer frequencies of 17 and 82 Hz. Pentobarbitone increased the comer frequency of the high frequency component but did not alter the apparent single channel conductance estimated from the noise.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Single channel recordings in either the cell‐attached or outside‐out patch configurations revealed that NMDA (20 or 50 μ<jats:sc>m</jats:sc>) opened channels with a main conductance level around 55 pS and a principal subconductance around 44 pS. The uncorrected mean open time of the channels was 3.4 ms and mean burst length was 6.0 ms. Mean cluster length was about 12 ms.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>Pentobarbitone produced a concentration‐dependent reduction in both mean open time and burst length. Mean cluster length was much less affected. Pentobarbitone did not decrease unitary current amplitude or bias the open‐state current amplitude distribution in favour of a particular substate.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>From these data it appears that pentobarbitone depresses the inward current evoked by NMDA by reducing the probability of channel opening and this results from a shortening of the lifetime of the channel open state and by decreasing burst length.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Effect of lutropin and cycloheximide on lutropin receptors and cyclic AMP production in Leydig tumour cells <i>in vitro</i> <jats:p>A system to study lutropin-induced desensitization of tumour Leydig cells in vitro has been investigated. Tumour Leydig cells were purified on a Percoll gradient and then incubated for 30 min with lutropin (0-1000ng/ml). The cells were then washed and incubated in suspension media at 32 degrees C. 125I-labelled human choriogonadotropin binding and basal and lutropin-stimulated cyclic AMP production were determined at various times. Initially the cells showed a dose-dependent decrease in human choriogonadotropin binding (1.18 and 0.13fmol/10(6) cells respectively) followed by an increase at 1 h (2.32 and 0.87fmol/10(6) cells respectively). Human choriogonadotropin binding remained elevated in the cells pre-incubated without lutropin
 whereas the cells pre-incubated with lutropin showed a dose-dependent decrease over the next 10 h (2.20-0.18fmol/10(6) cells respectively).
Basal production of cyclic AMP initially reflected the pre-incubation conditions (1.17-21.19ng/10(6) cells per h for 0-1000ng of lutropin/ml respectively).
However, by 1 h there was a marked rise in basal cyclic AMP production which returned to the initial lower values by 4 h. At all time intervals studied, lutropin-induced cyclic AMP production showed a decrease that was proportional to lutropin concentration in the pre-incubated media.
The decreases in human choriogonadotropin binding produced by pre-incubations with lutropin (100ng/ml) was partially inhibited by the presence of cycloheximide in the pre-incubation media and totally prevented by the continuous presence of cycloheximide.
These results demonstrate that desensitization of tumour Leydig cells occurs after exposure to lutropin in vitro.
This desensitization involves both a loss of plasma membrane receptors for lutropin and lutropin-stimulated adenylate cyclase.
These events can be prevented by cycloheximide and are therefore probably dependent on protein synthesis.</jats:p>
Overexpression of synapsin Ia in the rat calyx of Held accelerates short-term plasticity and decreases synaptic vesicle volume and active zone area 1. Front Cell Neurosci. 2013 Dec 20;7:270. doi: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00270. 
eCollection 2013.

Overexpression of synapsin Ia in the rat calyx of Held accelerates short-term 
plasticity and decreases synaptic vesicle volume and active zone area.

Vasileva M(1)
 Renden R(1), Horstmann H(1), Gitler D(2), Kuner T(1).
Author information:
(1)Institute of Anatomy and Cell Biology, Heidelberg University Heidelberg, 
Germany.
(2)Department of Physiology and Cell Biology, Faculty of Health Sciences and 
Zlotowski Center for Neuroscience, Ben-Gurion University of the Negev 
Beer-Sheva, Israel.
Synapsins are synaptic vesicle (SV) proteins organizing a component of the 
reserve pool of vesicles at most central nervous system synapses.
Alternative 
splicing of the three mammalian genes results in multiple isoforms that may 
differentially contribute to the organization and maintenance of the SV pools.
To address this, we first characterized the expression pattern of synapsin 
isoforms in the rat calyx of Held.
At postnatal day 16, synapsins Ia, Ib, IIb 
and IIIa were present, while IIa-known to sustain repetitive transmission in 
glutamatergic terminals-was not detectable.
To test if the synapsin I isoforms 
could mediate IIa-like effect, and if this depends on the presence of the 
E-domain, we overexpressed either synapsin Ia or synapsin Ib in the rat calyx of 
Held via recombinant adeno-associated virus-mediated gene transfer.
Although the 
size and overall structure of the perturbed calyces remained unchanged, 
short-term depression and recovery from depression were accelerated upon 
overexpression of synapsin I isoforms.
Using electron microscopic 
three-dimensional reconstructions we found a redistribution of SV clusters 
proximal to the active zones (AZ) alongside with a decrease of both AZ area and 
SV volume.
The number of SVs at individual AZs was strongly reduced.
Hence, our 
data indicate that the amount of synapsin Ia expressed in the calyx regulates 
the rate and extent of short-term synaptic plasticity by affecting vesicle 
recruitment to the AZ.
Finally, our study reveals a novel contribution of 
synapsin Ia to define the surface area of AZs.
DOI: 10.3389/fncel.2013.00270
PMCID: PMC3868894
PMID: 24391547
ON FIBRINOLYSIS IN REPRODUCTION 1. Acta Obstet Gynecol Scand Suppl. 1975;41:1-47.

On fibrinolysis in reproduction.

Liedholm P.

PMID: 1059309 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Low dose dexamethasone reverses depressive-like parameters and memory impairment in rats submitted to sepsis 1. Neurosci Lett. 2010 Apr 5;473(2):126-30. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.02.036.
Epub  2010 Feb 23.

Low dose dexamethasone reverses depressive-like parameters and memory impairment 
in rats submitted to sepsis.

Cassol OJ Jr(1)
 Comim CM, Petronilho F, Constantino LS, Streck EL, Quevedo J, 
Dal-Pizzol F.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Neurosciences and National Institute of Translational Science 
and Tecnology in Medicine, Posgraduation Program inPrograma de Pós-Graduação em 
Ciências da Saúde, Unidade Acadêmica de Ciências da Saúde, Universidade do 
Extremo Sul Catarinense, 88806-000 Criciúma, SC, Brazil.
Sepsis is characterized by a systemic inflammatory response of the immune system 
against an infection, presenting with hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis 
dysfunction, behavior alterations, and high mortality.
In this study, we aimed 
to evaluate the effects of dexamethasone on mortality, anhedonia, circulating 
corticosterone and adrenocorticotropin hormone (ACTH) levels, body and adrenal 
gland weight, and aversive memory in sepsis survivor rats.
Male Wistar rats 
underwent sham operation or cecal ligation and perforation (CLP) procedure.
Rats 
subjected to CLP were treated with "basic support" and dexamethasone (at 0.2 and 
2mg/kg daily for 7 days after CLP, intraperitonially) or saline.
After 10 days 
of sepsis procedure, it was evaluated aversive memory, sweet food consumption, 
and body and adrenal gland weight.
Serum and plasma were also obtained.
It was 
observed that low dose dexamethasone reverted anhedonia, normalized adrenal 
gland and body weight, corticosterone and ACTH levels, and decreased mortality 
and avoidance memory impairment, demonstrating that low doses of dexamethasone 
for moderate periods may be beneficial for sepsis treatment and its 
sequelae-depressive-like parameters and memory impairment.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2010.02.036
PMID: 20184944 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
‘The black dog just came and sat on my face and built a kennel’: Gay men making sense of ‘depression’ <jats:p> This article reports on in-depth interviews with gay men about their experiences and understanding of depression. It is a key outcome of the collaboration between social researchers
 general practitioners and community partners to investigate the management of depression in gay men in primary care settings.
As part of the qualitative arm of the project in-depth interviews were conducted with 40 gay men in Sydney and Adelaide (Australia).
The approach to discourse analysis is informed by Hallidayan systemic functional linguistics.
Six constructions of depression were identified: (1) depression as a constellation of symptoms; (2) symptoms constructed as experience; (3) depression as agent; (4) depression as mental processes; (5) not meeting social expectations; and (6) engaging with psychiatric discourse: constructing alternative positions.
Gay men draw on the biomedical model of depression as low mood and loss of pleasure as well as on constructions of depression in terms of social experience.
The biomedical model of depression is, however, not positioned as unproblematic.
Rather, gay men align or disalign with this discourse according to their own experience, thereby enacting diverse masculinities.
Gay men’s discourses of depression are inextricably linked to the community activism of gay men and their community organizations in the context of the HIV epidemic, as well as a synergy between gay men and their doctors.
</jats:p>
Studies of the growth of an ascitic tumour. II. A system to study the tumour-age dependent effect of antitumour agents 1. Eur J Cancer (1965). 1978 Jan;14(1):75-82. doi: 10.1016/0014-2964(78)90140-8.

Studies of the growth of an ascitic tumour. II. A system to study the tumour-age 
dependent effect of antitumour agents.

Kopper L
 Jeney A, Lapis K, Török M.

DOI: 10.1016/0014-2964(78)90140-8
PMID: 624305 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Triglyceride Lipase Activity in Bovine Aorta <jats:p>The cell-free supernatant from homogenized bovine aorta hydrolyzed triglycerides
 β-naphthylesters of lauric and stearic acid and Tween 20, 40 and 60.
The rate of hydrolysis decreases as the acyl chain length of the substrates increases.
The activity against triglycerides of short-chain fatty acids and monoacylesters could be partially separated from that of glycerol-trioleate lipase by ammonium sulfate fractionation.
The activity of glycerol-trioleate lipase remained unaffected by heating for 5 min at 60 °C or by addition of bile acids, whereas the activity causing hydrolysis of triglycerides with short-chain fatty acids and monoacylesters decreases up to 60% by analogous treatment.
No changes in the hydrolytic activity occurs in presence of sodium heparin.
This indicates that this activity is not identical with a lipoprotein lipase.</jats:p>
A new method to model electroconvulsive therapy in rats with increased construct validity and enhanced translational value 1. J Psychiatr Res. 2014 Jun;53:94-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.02.007. Epub
 2014 Feb 19.

A new method to model electroconvulsive therapy in rats with increased construct 
validity and enhanced translational value.

Theilmann W(1)
 Löscher W(1), Socala K(2), Frieling H(3), Bleich S(3), Brandt 
C(4).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Pharmacy, University of 
Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany; Center for Systems Neuroscience, 
Hannover, Germany.
(2)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Pharmacy, University of 
Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany.
(3)Department of Psychiatry, Social Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Medical School 
Hannover, Germany; Center for Systems Neuroscience, Hannover, Germany.
(4)Department of Pharmacology, Toxicology, and Pharmacy, University of 
Veterinary Medicine, Hannover, Germany; Center for Systems Neuroscience, 
Hannover, Germany.
Electronic address: claudia.brandt@tiho-hannover.de.
Electroconvulsive therapy is the most effective therapy for major depressive 
disorder (MDD).
The remission rate is above 50% in previously pharmacoresistant 
patients but the mechanisms of action are not fully understood.
Electroconvulsive stimulation (ECS) in rodents mimics antidepressant 
electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) in humans and is widely used to investigate the 
underlying mechanisms of ECT.
For the translational value of findings in animal 
models it is essential to establish models with the highest construct, face and 
predictive validity possible.
The commonly used model for ECT in rodents does 
not meet the demand for high construct validity.
For ECT, cortical surface 
electrodes are used to induce therapeutic seizures whereas ECS in rodents is 
exclusively performed by auricular or corneal electrodes.
However, the 
stimulation site has a major impact on the type and spread of the induced 
seizure activity and its antidepressant effect.
We propose a method in which ECS 
is performed by screw electrodes placed above the motor cortex of rats to 
closely simulate the clinical situation and thereby increase the construct 
validity of the model.
Cortical ECS in rats induced reliably seizures comparable 
to human ECT.
Cortical ECS was more effective than auricular ECS to reduce 
immobility in the forced swim test.
Importantly, auricular stimulation had a 
negative influence on the general health condition of the rats with signs of 
fear during the stimulation sessions.
These results suggest that auricular ECS 
in rats is not a suitable ECT model.
Cortical ECS in rats promises to be a valid 
method to mimic ECT.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jpsychires.2014.02.007
PMID: 24607291 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Anomalous Results of Studies on Drug Interaction in Man 1. Pharmacology. 1975;13(2):112-27. doi: 10.1159/000136892.

Anomalous results of studies on drug interaction in man. II. Halofenate (mk-185) 
and antipyrine
 bishydroxycoumarin, and warfarin.
Vesell ES, Passananti GT.
Three highly reproducible experiments on drug interaction in normal human 
volunteers provided anomalous results: chronic halofenate administration 
shortened plasma antipyrine and bishydroxycoumarin half-lives but prolonged 
plasma warfarin half-lives.
This dissociation in the effect produced by a 
chronically administered drug on the metabolism of test drugs has not previously 
been reported in man.
Chronic halofenate administration to rats, mice and dogs 
stimulated several hepatic microsomal drug-metabolizing systems, including those 
responsible for bishydroxycoumarin warfarin hydroxylation.
DOI: 10.1159/000136892
PMID: 49900 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of externally added ATP on glucose uptake by isolated rat soleus muscle 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1970;196(2):327-35. doi: 10.1016/0005-2736(70)90020-9.

Effect of externally added ATP on glucose uptake by isolated rat soleus muscle.

Chaudry IH
 Gould MK.
DOI: 10.1016/0005-2736(70)90020-9
PMID: 4984212 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant-Like Effect of D2/3 Receptor-
 but not D4 Receptor-Activation in the Rat Forced Swim Test 1.
Neuropsychopharmacology.
2005 Jul;30(7):1257-68. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300677.
Antidepressant-like effect of D(2/3) receptor-, but not D(4) receptor-activation 
in the rat forced swim test.
Basso AM(1), Gallagher KB, Bratcher NA, Brioni JD, Moreland RB, Hsieh GC, 
Drescher K, Fox GB, Decker MW, Rueter LE.
Author information:
(1)Abbott Laboratories, Neuroscience Research, Global Pharmaceutical Research 
and Development, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA.
Ana.basso@abbott.com

Dopamine plays a role in the pathophysiology of depression and therapeutic 
effects of antidepressants but the contribution of individual D(2)-like receptor 
subtypes (D(2), D(3), D(4)) to depression is not known.
We present evidence that 
activation of D(2)/D(3), but not D(4) receptors, can affect the outcome in the 
rat forced swim test (FST).
Nomifensine, a dopamine uptake inhibitor (7, 14, and 
28 micromol/kg); quinpirole, a D(2)-like receptor and agonist (0.4, 1.0, and 2.0 
micromol/kg); PD 12,8907, a preferential D(3) receptor agonist (0.17, 0.35, and 
0.7 micromol/kg); PD 168077 (0.1, 0.3, and 1.0 micromol/kg) and CP 226269 (0.3, 
1.0, and 3.0 micromol/kg), both selective D(4) receptor agonists, were 
administered s.c. 24, 5, and 0.5/1 h before testing.
Nomifensine, quinpirole at 
all doses and PD 128907 at the highest dose decreased immobility time in FST.
PD 
168077 and CP 226269 had no effect on the model.
To further clarify what type of 
dopamine receptors were involved in the anti-immobility effect of quinpirole, we 
tested different antagonists.
Haloperidol, a D(2)-like receptor antagonist (0.27 
micromol/kg), completely blocked the effect of quinpirole; A-437203 (LU-201640), 
a selective D(3) receptor antagonist (17.46 micromol/kg), showed a 
nonsignificant trend to attenuate the effect of the low dose of quinpirole, and 
L-745,870, a selective D(4) receptor antagonist (1.15 micromol/kg), had no 
effect.
The pharmacological selectivity of the compounds tested suggests that 
the antidepressant-like effects of quinpirole are most likely mediated mainly by 
D(2) and to a lesser extent by D(3) but not D(4) receptors.
DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1300677
PMID: 15688083 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Differential effects of tumor necrosis factor-alpha co-administered with amyloid beta-peptide (25–35) on memory function and hippocampal damage in rat 1. Behav Brain Res. 2006 Dec 15;175(2):352-61. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.09.006.
Epub  2006 Oct 27.

Differential effects of tumor necrosis factor-alpha co-administered with amyloid 
beta-peptide (25-35) on memory function and hippocampal damage in rat.

Stepanichev M(1)
 Zdobnova I, Zarubenko I, Lazareva N, Gulyaeva NV.
Author information:
(1)Department of Functional Biochemistry of the Nervous System, Institute of 
Higher Nervous Activity and Neurophysiology, Russian Academy of Sciences, 5a 
Butlerov Street, Moscow 117485, Russia.
Effects of concurrent intracerebroventricular administration of amyloid-beta 
peptide 25-35 (Abeta(25-35)) and the proinflammatory cytokine tumor necrosis 
factor-alpha (TNFalpha) to rats were investigated.
A battery of behavioral tests 
including radial arm maze, passive avoidance, elevated plus-maze and forced swim 
test as well as histological methods were used.
A single administration of 
Abeta(25-35) induced delayed behavioral deficits manifested in reference and 
working memory disturbances in the radial maze task involving spatial memory.
However, no effects of Abeta(25-35) on learning or retention in a passive 
avoidance test could be revealed.
Abeta(25-35) appeared to decrease anxiety 
without affecting depression-like behavior in the rats.
Abeta(25-35)-induced 
cognitive deficits could be related to the moderate neuronal cell loss found in 
the hippocampal CA1 field.
Though administration of TNFalpha did not impair 
learning and memory of rats in the radial maze, it induced gross changes in 
their behavior during passive avoidance training.
Though TNFalpha did not 
protect against Abeta(25-35)-induced neuronal cell loss in the CA1 field of 
hippocampus, co-administration of TNFalpha with Abeta(25-35) resulted in an 
improvement of reference memory impaired by the amyloid peptide, but not of 
working memory.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2006.09.006
PMID: 17070605 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of the dsRNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) in the attenuation of protein loss from muscle by insulin and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I) 1. Mol Cell Biochem. 2008 Jun;313(1-2):63-9. doi: 10.1007/s11010-008-9742-4. Epub
 2008 Mar 23.

Role of the dsRNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) in the attenuation of protein 
loss from muscle by insulin and insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I).

Eley HL(1)
 Russell ST, Tisdale MJ.
Author information:
(1)Nutritional Biomedicine, School of Life and Health Sciences, Aston 
University, Birmingham B4 7ET, UK.
Proteolysis-inducing factor (PIF), a tumour-produced cachectic factor, induced a 
dose-dependent decrease in protein synthesis in murine myotubes, together with 
an increase in phosphorylation of eucaryotic initiation factor 2 (eIF2) on the 
alpha-subunit.
Both insulin (1 nM) and insulin-like growth factor I (IGF-I) 
(13.2 nM) attenuated the depression of protein synthesis by PIF and the 
increased phosphorylation of eIF2alpha, by inhibiting the activation 
(autophosphorylation) of the dsRNA-dependent protein kinase (PKR) by induction 
of protein phosphatase 1.
A low-molecular weight inhibitor of PKR also reversed 
the depression of protein synthesis by PIF to the same extent, as did insulin 
and IGF-I.
Both insulin and IGF-I-stimulated protein synthesis in the presence 
of PIF, and this was attenuated by Salubrinal, an inhibitor of phospho eIF2alpha 
phosphatase, suggesting that at least part of this action was due to their 
ability to inhibit phosphorylation of eIF2alpha.
Both insulin and IGF-I also 
attenuated the induction of protein degradation in myotubes induced by PIF, this 
effect was also attenuated by Salubrinal.
These results suggest an alternative 
mechanism involving PKR to explain the effect of insulin and IGF-I on protein 
synthesis and degradation in skeletal muscle in the presence of catabolic 
factors.
DOI: 10.1007/s11010-008-9742-4
PMID: 18360789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Study of Direct Effect of Methimazole on Thymidine Incorporation in FRTL-5 Cells 1. Nihon Naibunpi Gakkai Zasshi. 1989 Jan 20;65(1):32-41. doi: 
10.1507/endocrine1927.65.1_32.

[The study of direct effect of methimazole on thymidine incorporation in FRTL-5 
cells].

[Article in Japanese]

Urabe M(1).

Author information:
(1)Fourth Department of Internal Medicine
 Saitama Medical School, Japan.
During the course of treatment of Graves' disease with the anti-thyroid drug, 
methimazole (MMI), a decrease in a patient's goiter size is sometimes observed.
Using rat thyroid cell strain, FRTL-5, the direct effect of MMI on thyroid cell 
growth was investigated.
FRTL-5 cells (2 X 10(5)) were cultured for 48 hours 
with TSH, (Bu)2 cAMP or forskolin in the presence of [3H]-thymidine.
All three 
stimulators increased cell growth, expressed as [3H]-thymidine incorporation 
into DNA in a dose-dependent fashion.
When FRTL-5 cells were cultured for 48 
hours in the presence of MMI at 10(-6)-10(-3) M with these stimulators (TSH 250 
microU/ml, (Bu)2 cAMP 10(-3) M, forskolin 10(-5) M), [3H]-thymidine 
incorporation was suppressed in dose-dependent fashions (MMI 10(-5) M-10(-3) M).
From the present study, it is suggested that methimazole directly modulates 
thyroid cell growth induced by thyroid growth stimulators which are involved in 
adenylate cyclase-cyclic AMP system and that the site of its action exists 
beyond cAMP production.
DOI: 10.1507/endocrine1927.65.1_32
PMID: 2542105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Splenic perfusion in the combined treatment of patients with systemic lupus erythematosus]. 1. Ter Arkh. 1993;65(5):61-5.

[Splenic perfusion in the combined treatment of patients with systemic lupus 
erythematosus].

[Article in Russian]

Tsypin AB
 Nasonova VA, Vedernikova LA, Solov'ev SK, Velikaia MV, Chiklikchi AS, 
Sazhina EG.
Twenty patients suffering from severe systemic lupus erythematosus (SLE) 
underwent 52 sessions of splenoperfusion (SP) by means of extracorporeal 
perfusion of the patient's blood through isolated porcine spleen.
It got 
prepared directly before the perfusion.
The organ was obtained from a healthy 
animal in sterile conditions, washed from the blood after cannulation of the 
artery and vein.
The patient's blood was pumped from the peripheral vein to the 
spleen artery.
After passing through the splenic vascular bed the blood outflew 
from the spleen vein into the opposite peripheral vein of the patient.
SP was 
followed by positive clinical changes: normalization of body temperature, 
regression of skin symptoms and articular syndrome, reduction of 
lymphadenopathy, hepato- and splenomegaly.
The tests indicated inhibition of SLE 
activity.
Sp-related immunocorrective effect was also present as shown by 
depression of B-cell hyperreactivity and T-cell immunity stimulation.
1-4-year 
follow-up of 19 patients showed them to be in remission.
The data obtained 
favour SP inclusion into intensive therapy of severe SLE.
PMID: 8036600 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Effects of Acute Stress-Induced Sleep Disturbance on Acoustic Trauma-Induced Tinnitus in Rats <jats:p>Chronic tinnitus is a debilitating condition and often accompanied by anxiety
 depression, and sleep disturbance.
It has been suggested that sleep disturbance, such as insomnia, may be a risk factor/predictor for tinnitus-related distress and the two conditions may share common neurobiological mechanisms.
This study investigated whether acute stress-induced sleep disturbance could increase the susceptibility to acoustic trauma-induced tinnitus in rats.
The animals were exposed to unilateral acoustic trauma 24 h before sleep disturbance being induced using the cage exchange method.
Tinnitus perception was assessed behaviourally using a conditioned lick suppression paradigm 3 weeks after the acoustic trauma.
Changes in the orexin system in the hypothalamus, which plays an important role in maintaining long-lasting arousal, were also examined using immunohistochemistry.
Cage exchange resulted in a significant reduction in the number of sleep episodes and acoustic trauma-induced tinnitus with acoustic features similar to a 32 kHz tone at 100 dB.
However, sleep disturbance did not exacerbate the perception of tinnitus in rats.
Neither tinnitus alone nor tinnitus plus sleep disturbance altered the number of orexin-expressing neurons.
The results suggest that acute sleep disturbance does not cause long-term changes in the number of orexin neurons and does not change the perception of tinnitus induced by acoustic trauma in rats.</jats:p>
Clonidine: antidepressant potential? 1. Prog Clin Biol Res. 1981;71:165-75.

Clonidine: antidepressant potential?

Malick JB.

PMID: 6276893 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Chaiyuwendan decoction on endocannabinoids levels in adipose tissue of rats with chronic stress-induced depression 1. J Tradit Chin Med. 2014 Feb;34(1):96-9. doi: 10.1016/s0254-6272(14)60061-3.

Effects of chaiyuwendan decoction on endocannabinoids levels in adipose tissue 
of rats with chronic stress-induced depression.

Chen S
 Zhao X, Lu F, Wang Y, Li S, Yan B, Zhou H.

OBJECTIVE: To investigate how Chaiyuwendan decoction (CWD) affects 
endocannabinoid levels in the adipose tissue of depressed rats.
METHODS: Twenty-four male Sprague-Dawley rats were randomly divided into four 
groups with six rats in each.
One group was randomly selected as the control 
group.
The remaining three groups were subjected to chronic stress to induce 
depression.
Groups were randomly assigned as a model group, CWD group, and 
amitriptyline group.
CWD was given to the CWD group once a day from the second 
day of modeling.
The amitriptyline group was administered amitriptyline 
intragastrically (10 mg/kg) once a day.
After treatment for 21 days, body weight 
and fat weight were measured and the levels of N-arachidonoylethanolamine (AEA), 
2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG), and N-palmitoylethanolamine (PEA) in adipose 
tissue were determined with liquid chromatography-mass spectrometry.
RESULTS: Compared with the control group, body weight, fat weight, AEA, and PEA 
were significantly lower, and 2-AG was higher, in the model group (P < 0.05, P < 
0.01).
Compared with the model group, body weight, fat weight, the AEA, and PEA 
levels were significantly higher, and 2-AG level was significantly lower in the 
CWD group (P < 0.05).
However, the levels did not differ significantly between 
the CWD group and the amitriptyline group.
CONCLUSION: CWD could regulate the levels of AEA, 2-AG, and PEA in rats with 
depression induced by chronic stress.
DOI: 10.1016/s0254-6272(14)60061-3
PMID: 25102698 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Unilateral deep brain stimulation in the nucleus accumbens core does not affect local monoamine release 1. J Neurosci Methods. 2011 Nov 15;202(2):113-8. doi: 
10.1016/j.jneumeth.2011.04.034. Epub 2011 May 5.

Unilateral deep brain stimulation in the nucleus accumbens core does not affect 
local monoamine release.

van Dijk A(1)
 Mason O, Klompmakers AA, Feenstra MG, Denys D.

Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Academic Medical Center, University of Amsterdam, 
Postbus 22660, 1100 DD Amsterdam, The Netherlands.
a.vandijk@amc.nl

Recent publications have shown promising results of deep brain stimulation (DBS) 
in the nucleus accumbens for patients with obsessive compulsive disorder and 
major depressive disorder.
Despite its increasing application in the clinical 
setting, the neurobiological mechanism of action of DBS is still uncertain.
One 
of the possible effects of DBS might be phasic or tonic changes in monoamine 
release either locally in the target area or in a distant, connected region.
In 
the present study we investigate whether unilateral DBS of the Nucleus Accumbens 
Core (NAc core) has a local effect on in vivo monoamine release.
Freely moving 
animals were unilaterally stimulated with 300 μA or 400 μA (120 Hz, pulse width 
80 μs) in the NAc core for 5 h. 1h before and during stimulation we measured 
dopamine, serotonin, their metabolites and noradrenaline using in vivo 
microdialysis.
We found no significant effect of stimulation on extracellular 
concentrations of monoaminergic neurotransmitters or their metabolites in the 
NAc core during stimulation.
Our results suggest that the rapid effects of DBS 
in the NAc are not a result of changes in local monoamine release in the NAc 
core.
For future directions it is interesting to note that several microdialysis 
and electrophysiology studies have shown effects of DBS in areas distant from 
the stimulation target.
Copyright © 2011 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jneumeth.2011.04.034
PMID: 21565219 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Rabbits with a genetic impairment in baroreceptor reflex sensitivity show abnormal renal haemodynamics and proximal tubular sodium reabsorption in response to a saline infusion 1. J Hypertens. 1993 Aug;11(8):799-804. doi: 10.1097/00004872-199308000-00006.

Rabbits with a genetic impairment in baroreceptor reflex sensitivity show 
abnormal renal haemodynamics and proximal tubular sodium reabsorption in 
response to a saline infusion.

Razin M(1)
 Borosh M, Weinstock M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, School of Pharmacy, Hebrew University Hadassah 
Medical Centre, Jerusalem, Israel.
OBJECTIVE: To compare renal haemodynamics and proximal tubular sodium 
reabsorption (PTSR) in response to an acute intravenous saline infusion in 
rabbits bred for genetic differences in cardiac baroreflex sensitivity (BRS).
Rabbits with low BRS increase their blood pressure significantly on a high-salt 
diet, in association with an initial delay in sodium excretion.
It was 
hypothesized that this could occur through an impaired baroreflex regulation of 
renal sympathetic nerve activity.
This, in turn, would alter renal blood flow 
and PTSR.
DESIGN: Experiments were performed in two groups of normotensive male rabbits (n 
= 10 per group), one of which had high BRS (> 5 beats/min per mmHg; group I) and 
one of which had low BRS (< 4 beats/min per mmHg; group II).
Effective renal 
plasma flow (ERPF) was measured by para-aminohippuric acid clearance, and PTSR 
by the lithium clearance technique.
Sodium, lithium, para-aminohippuric acid and 
glomerular filtration rate were measured from urine samples collected every 30 
min (for 90 min) via an indwelling bladder catheter, during a control infusion 
of glucose (30 mg/ml) NaCl (1.8 mg/ml), and for 2 h after a threefold increase 
in NaCl.
RESULTS: Group I rabbits increased their ERPF by approximately 40%, in response 
to saline, and doubled their sodium and lithium clearances within the 2 h, but 
those in group II did not change their cation excretion or their ERPF 
significantly during this period.
Blood pressure did not increase in either 
group.
CONCLUSIONS: A genetic impairment in BRS may be responsible for the inadequate 
depression of renal sympathetic nerve activity, which results in a failure to 
increase ERPF and suppress sodium reabsorption in the proximal tubule in 
response to salt loading.
DOI: 10.1097/00004872-199308000-00006
PMID: 8228203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pathobiology of A/Chicken/Hong Kong/220/97 (H5N1) Avian Influenza Virus in Seven Gallinaceous Species <jats:p> Direct bird-to-human transmission
 with the production of severe respiratory disease and human mortality, is unique to the Hong Kong-origin H5N1 highly pathogenic avian influenza (HPAI) virus, which was originally isolated from a disease outbreak in chickens.
The pathobiology of the A/chicken/Hong Kong/ 220/97 (H5N1) (HK/220) HPAI virus was investigated in chickens, turkeys, Japanese and Bobwhite quail, guinea fowl, pheasants, and partridges, where it produced 75-100% mortality within 10 days.
Depression, mucoid diarrhea, and neurologic dysfunction were common clinical manifestations of disease.
Grossly, the most severe and consistent lesions included splenomegaly, pulmonary edema and congestion, and hemorrhages in enteric lymphoid areas, on serosal surfaces, and in skeletal muscle.
Histologic lesions were observed in multiple organs and were characterized by exudation, hemorrhage, necrosis, inflammation, or a combination of these features.
The lung, heart, brain, spleen, and adrenal glands were the most consistently affected, and viral antigen was most often detected by immunohistochemistry in the parenchyma of these organs.
The pathogenesis of infection with the HK/220 HPAI virus in these species was twofold.
Early mortality occurring at 1-2 days postinoculation (DPI) corresponded to severe pulmonary edema and congestion and virus localization within the vascular endothelium.
Mortality occurring after 2 DPI was related to systemic biochemical imbalance, multiorgan failure, or a combination of these factors.
The pathobiologic features were analogous to those experimentally induced with other HPAI viruses in domestic poultry.
</jats:p>
Acidic and basic fibroblast growth factor levels in spinal cord cultures are not regulated by alterations in heparan sulfate proteoglycan expression <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:sec><jats:label /><jats:p>The present study was undertaken to assess both the levels of acidic and basic fibroblast growth factors in spinal cord cultures and to determine how they were presented to responsive cells. Western blots detected a single acidic fibroblast growth factor‐like protein (17 kDa) and two (18 kDa
 24 kDa) basic fibroblast growth factor‐immunoreactive proteins, the levels of which varied with the antibody used.
Levels of all three proteins were unaltered in cultures grown in the presence of a mitotic inhibitor, which greatly reduced the number of astrocytes.
Cell blots showed increased survival of spinal cord neurons at M<jats:sub>r</jats:sub> that corresponded with the three proteins detected immunologically.
Solubilized cultures separated on a P100 column showed mitogenic activity for NIH3T3 cells from 17–18 and 24 kDa fractions.
Treatment of the cultures with heparitinase did not decrease the levels of acidic and basic fibroblast growth factors detected by Western blots, suggesting that these proteins were not associated with extracellular membrane heparan sulfate proteoglycans.
The major fraction of both proteins appeared to be intracellular with a minor amount complexed with extracellular matrix proteins.
An inhibitor of xylose‐linked proteoglycan synthesis significantly altered heparan sulfate proteoglycan deposition into extracellular matrix, but did not alter the levels of acidic or basic fibroblast growth factors detected by Western blots, or the levels of choline acetyltransferase, glutamic acid decarboxylase, or aspartate aminotransferase activities.
These results indicate that both acidic and basic fibroblast growth factors are stored predominantly intracellularly, with only a minor fraction complexed with extracellular proteins.
We suggest that these intracellular proteins may be released following injury in the CNS and mediate a cascade of neuroprotective events.</jats:p></jats:sec>
[Cortical influences on the auditory analyzer system]. 1. Nerv Sist. 1968;9:93-8.

[Cortical influences on the auditory analyzer system].

[Article in Russian]

Vasil'eva LA
 Samoĭlova LA.
PMID: 5760020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of sodium selenite
 sodium tellurite and sodium sulfite on retention and distribution of mercury in mice].
1.
Arch Toxikol.
1969;24(3):296-305.
[Effect of sodium selenite, sodium tellurite and sodium sulfite on retention and 
distribution of mercury in mice].
[Article in German]

Eybl V, Sýkora J, Mertl F.

PMID: 5360665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Calcium-Dependent But Action Potential-Independent BCM-Like Metaplasticity in the Hippocampus <jats:p>The Bienenstock
 Cooper and Munro (BCM) computational model, which incorporates a metaplastic sliding threshold for LTP induction, accounts well for experience-dependent changes in synaptic plasticity in the visual cortex.
BCM-like metaplasticity over a shorter timescale has also been observed in the hippocampus, thus providing a tractable experimental preparation for testing specific predictions of the model.
Here, using extracellular and intracellular electrophysiological recordings from acute rat hippocampal slices, we tested the critical BCM predictions (1) that high levels of synaptic activation will induce a metaplastic state that spreads across dendritic compartments, and (2) that postsynaptic cell-firing is the critical trigger for inducing that state.
In support of the first premise, high-frequency priming stimulation inhibited subsequent long-term potentiation and facilitated subsequent long-term depression at synapses quiescent during priming, including those located in a dendritic compartment different to that of the primed pathway.
These effects were not dependent on changes in synaptic inhibition or NMDA/metabotropic glutamate receptor function.
However, in contrast to the BCM prediction, somatic action potentials during priming were neither necessary nor sufficient to induce the metaplasticity effect.
Instead, in broad agreement with derivatives of the BCM model, calcium as released from intracellular stores and triggered by M1 muscarinic acetylcholine receptor activation was critical for altering subsequent synaptic plasticity.
These results indicate that synaptic plasticity in stratum radiatum of CA1 can be homeostatically regulated by the cell-wide history of synaptic activity through a calcium-dependent but action potential-independent mechanism.</jats:p>
[Comparative studies on the effect of propranolol and oxyfedrine on body temperature in hypothermia]. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1969 Nov;19(11):1828-9.

[Comparative studies on the effect of propranolol and oxyfedrine on body 
temperature in hypothermia].

[Article in German]

Arkenau C
 Bosse AJ, Schaum E.

PMID: 4391789 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cytostatica- und R�ntgenstrahleneffekte im Nucleins�urestoffwechsel von soliden
 malignen Tumoren in vitro 1.
Z Krebsforsch.
1970;74(1):76-90.
[Effects of cytostatics and x-rays on nucleic acid metabolism of solid, 
malignant tumors in vitro].
[Article in German]

Kummer D.

PMID: 4254297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Autolysis of beta-Trypsin. Influence of Calcium Ions and Heat. 1. Acta Chem Scand. 1973;27(6):1971-81. doi: 10.3891/acta.chem.scand.27-1971.

Autolysis of beta-trypsin. Influence of calcium ions and heat.

Gabel D
 Kasche V.

DOI: 10.3891/acta.chem.scand.27-1971
PMID: 4796159 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hemodynamic effects of adenosine di-phosphate (ADP). 1. J Oslo City Hosp. 1973 Jun-Jul;23(6):111-8.

Hemodynamic effects of adenosine di-phosphate (ADP).

Hoie J.

PMID: 4771836 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Opposite effects of cyclophosphamide pretreatment on tuberculin hypersensitivity during the course of sensitization of mice with mycobacterium bovis BCG 1. Int J Immunopharmacol. 1985;7(5):687-95. doi: 10.1016/0192-0561(85)90153-5.

Opposite effects of cyclophosphamide pretreatment on tuberculin hypersensitivity 
during the course of sensitization of mice with Mycobacterium bovis BCG.

Turcotte R.

The influence of cyclophosphamide (CY) pretreatment upon the development of 
tuberculin hypersensitivity has been studied during the course of infection of 
mice with BCG. An enhancement of the DTH response to BCG antigens occurred 
during the induction phase
 whereas a depression of this response occurred at 
the peak and during the decay phase of sensitization.
The development of the 
early DTH-promoting and of the late DTH-depressing effect of CY was favoured by 
the use of a supra-optimal dose of BCG.
Both these effects were cell-dependent 
since they could be transferred adoptively to syngeneic recipient mice with 
sensitized lymphoid cells but not with specific immune sera.
Pretreatment with 
CY favoured the emergence of cells capable of responding in vitro to BCG 
antigens in the draining lymph nodes of BCG-infected mice.
No simple association 
however, exists between this in vitro lymphocyte transformation response and the 
DTH response.
DOI: 10.1016/0192-0561(85)90153-5
PMID: 4044094 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Madness 1. Emerg Infect Dis. 2002 Sep;8(9):998-1002. doi: 10.3201/eid0809.ad0809.

Madness.

Callahan GN(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Microbiology
 Immunology, and Pathology, Colorado State 
University, Fort Collins, USA.
DOI: 10.3201/eid0809.ad0809
PMCID: PMC2732545
PMID: 12219740 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Specific antagonism of GABA‐mediated postsynaptic inhibition in cultured mammalian spinal cord neurons 1. Neurology. 1978 Apr;28(4):325-30. doi: 10.1212/wnl.28.4.325.

Specific antagonism of GABA-mediated postsynaptic inhibition in cultured 
mammalian spinal cord neurons: a common mode of convulsant action.

Macdonald RL
 Barker JL.
Mammalian spinal neurons grown in tissue culture were used to study the effects 
of the four convulsants-penicillin, pentylenetetrazol, picrotoxin, and 
bicuculline-on these neurons' responses to amino acids.
Bath application of all 
four convulsants produced paroxysmal depolarizing events in the neurons; 
iontophoresis of the four convulsants selectively depressed responses produced 
by iontophoresis of the putative inhibitory transmitter GABA, and effected this 
depression without altering either inhibitory responses to beta-alanine or 
glycine, or excitation mediated by glutamate.
These results support the 
hypothesis that the convulsant activity of these agents comes in part from 
selective antagonism of GABA-mediated postsynaptic inhibition.
DOI: 10.1212/wnl.28.4.325
PMID: 565020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of the antiglucocorticoid RU 38486 on the induction of learned helpless behavior in Sprague-Dawley rats 1. Brain Res. 1993 Jul 2;615(2):304-9. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(93)90042-l.

Effects of the antiglucocorticoid RU 38486 on the induction of learned helpless 
behavior in Sprague-Dawley rats.

Papolos DF(1)
 Edwards E, Marmur R, Lachman HM, Henn FA.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Albert Einstein College of Medicine, Bronx, NY 
10461.
Learned helplessness (LH) is induced by exposure to an inescapable or 
uncontrollable stressor which results in an inability to escape or avoid the 
same stressor when subsequently presented in a different context.
In order to 
understand which central mechanisms may influence the expression of the learned 
helpless phenotype, we have pursued an experimental approach that seeks to 
elucidate the behavioral effects of glucocorticoid (GC) hormones in this animal 
model of depression.
We have previously shown that the induction of LH behavior 
is enhanced by adrenalectomy, an effect that is reversed by corticosterone.
In 
this study, our aim was to attempt to locate CNS sites responsible for the 
observed effects of glucocorticoids on learned helpless behavior by introducing 
the type II GC receptor antagonist, RU 38486 to discrete brain regions.
We did 
not observe a significant effect in LH with acute systemic, acute dentate gyrus 
or intracerebroventricular injection of RU 38486 in contrast to previous studies 
using the Porsolt swim test, another animal model of depression.
However, we 
were able to observe a significant change upon chronic administration to the 
dentate gyrus.
These findings suggest that glucocorticoids exert a long-term 
influence on stress-induced behavior, presumably by affecting glucocorticoid 
responsive genes in the dentate gyrus.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(93)90042-l
PMID: 8364739 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Protective effects of chronic mild stress during adolescence in the low-novelty responder rat 1. Stress. 2016;19(1):133-8. doi: 10.3109/10253890.2015.1108304. Epub 2015 Nov
20.

Protective effects of chronic mild stress during adolescence in the low-novelty 
responder rat.

Rana S(1)(2)
 Nam H(1)(2), Glover ME(1)(3), Akil H(4), Watson SJ(4), Clinton 
SM(1), Kerman IA(1).
Author information:
(1)a Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Neurobiology .
(2)b Department of Cell , Molecular, and Developmental Biology and.
(3)c Department of Neuroscience , Graduate Biomedical Sciences, University of 
Alabama at Birmingham , Birmingham , AL , USA , and.
(4)d Department of Molecular and Behavioral Neuroscience Institute , University 
of Michigan , Ann Arbor , MI , USA.
Stress-elicited behavioral and physiologic responses vary widely across 
individuals and depend on a combination of environmental and genetic factors.
Adolescence is an important developmental period when neural circuits that guide 
emotional behavior and stress reactivity are still maturing.
A critical question 
is whether stress exposure elicits contrasting effects when it occurs during 
adolescence versus adulthood.
We previously found that Sprague-Dawley rats 
selectively bred for low-behavioral response to novelty (bred Low Responders; 
bLRs) are particularly sensitive to chronic unpredictable mild stress (CMS) 
exposure in adulthood, which exacerbates their typically high levels of 
spontaneous depressive- and anxiety-like behavior.
Given developmental processes 
known to occur during adolescence, we sought to determine whether the impact of 
CMS on bLR rats is equivalent when they are exposed to it during adolescence as 
compared with adulthood.
Young bLR rats were either exposed to CMS or control 
condition from postnatal days 35-60.
As adults, we found that CMS-exposed bLRs 
maintained high levels of sucrose preference and exhibited increased social 
exploration along with decreased immobility on the forced swim test compared 
with bLR controls.
These data indicate a protective effect of CMS exposure 
during adolescence in bLR rats.
DOI: 10.3109/10253890.2015.1108304
PMCID: PMC4903024
PMID: 26473581 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Conflict of Interest Statement: The authors 
declare that the research was conducted in the absence of any commercial or 
financial relationships that could be construed as a potential conflict of 
interest.
Hemodynamic effects of butorphanol-oxygen anesthesia in dogs. 1. Anesth Analg. 1981 Oct;60(10):715-9.

Hemodynamic effects of butorphanol-oxygen anesthesia in dogs.

Sederberg J
 Stanley TH, Reddy P, Liu WS, Port D, Gillmor S.

The cardiovascular effects of two intravenous rates of butorphanol infusion (0.1 
and 0.2 mg/kg/min) were measured in 32 dogs breathing oxygen and nitrous oxide 
in oxygen.
Sixteen dogs were premedicated with atropine and the other 16 were 
unpremedicated.
Of the dogs receiving the higher dose infusion rate, 25% moved 
with a tail-clamp stimulus whereas 75% moved with the lower doses.
Butorphanol 
produced significant but similar cardiovascular depression with the two rates of 
infusion irrespective of the presence or absence of atropine medication.
Addition of nitrous oxide resulted in further cardiac depression in all groups 
studied.
The data suggest that butorphanol is not an attractive alternative to 
morphine or fentanyl as a narcotic anesthetic.
PMID: 7197474 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long-Term Depression in Hippocampal Interneurons: Joint Requirement for Pre- and Postsynaptic Events <jats:p>
            Long-term depression (LTD) is a well-known form of synaptic plasticity of principal neurons in the mammalian brain. Whether such changes occur in interneurons is still controversial. CA3 hippocampal interneurons expressing Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            -permeable AMPA receptors exhibited LTD after tetanic stimulation of CA3 excitatory inputs. LTD was independent of NMDA receptors and required both Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            influx through postsynaptic AMPA receptors and activation of presynaptic mGluR7-like receptors. These results point to the capability of interneurons to undergo plastic changes of synaptic strength through joint activation of pre- and postsynaptic glutamate receptors.
          </jats:p>
Synergistic antidepressant-like effects between a kappa opioid antagonist (LY2444296) and a delta opioid agonist (ADL5859) in the mouse forced swim test 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 2016 Jun 15;781:53-9. doi: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2016.03.061. Epub
 2016 Apr 1.

Synergistic antidepressant-like effects between a kappa opioid antagonist 
(LY2444296) and a delta opioid agonist (ADL5859) in the mouse forced swim test.

Huang P(1)
 Tunis J(1), Parry C(1), Tallarida R(1), Liu-Chen LY(2).
Author information:
(1)Center for Substance Abuse Research and Department of Pharmacology, Temple 
University Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, United States.
(2)Center for Substance Abuse Research and Department of Pharmacology, Temple 
University Lewis Katz School of Medicine, Philadelphia, PA 19140, United States.
Electronic address: lliuche@temple.edu.
Kappa opioid (KOP) receptor antagonists and delta opioid (DOP) receptor agonists 
have antidepressant-like effects in animal tests and may be useful for 
treatment-resistant depression in humans.
In this study, we examined whether the 
combination of a KOP receptor antagonist and a DOP receptor agonist would 
produce a better than additive effect (i.e.
synergy).
LY2444296 is a 
short-acting selective nonpeptide KOP receptor antagonist.
ADL5859 is a 
selective nonpeptide DOP receptor agonist which does not produce seizures and 
EEG disturbances.
Each compound and combinations of the two were examined in the 
forced swim test (FST) one h post injection, a screening test for 
antidepressant-like effect, in male adult C57BL/6J mice (Jackson Lab).
LY2444296 
[subcutaneous (s.c.) injection] at 10 and 30mg/kg, but not 3mg/kg, significantly 
decreased immobility time in a dose-dependent manner.
Intraperitoneal (i.p.)
injections of ADL5859 also reduced immobility time dose-dependently at doses of 
3 and 10mg/kg, but not at 1mg/kg.
An analysis was conducted using the method of 
Tallarida and Raffa (2010), which employed dose equivalence.
The relative 
potency of the drugs was determined to be LY2444296: ADL5859=1:0.28, which was 
the dose ratio for combination studies.
Six combinations of the two compounds 
were tested in mice at a fixed dose ratio.
We found that LY2444296 and ADL5859 
yielded significant synergistic effects for the antidepressant-like effect at 
the combined dose ranging from 3.84mg/kg to 9.0mg/kg.
ADL5859 (10mg/kg), 
LY2444296 (30mg/kg) and their combined dose (3.84mg/kg) had no effects on 
locomotor activities.
Since the two drugs have distinct pharmacological 
profiles, such a synergism will allow use of lower doses of both drugs to 
achieve desired antidepressant effects with fewer side effects.
Copyright © 2016 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.ejphar.2016.03.061
PMCID: PMC5444937
PMID: 27044434 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure: The authors have no conflicts of 
interest to disclose.
Harsh environments
 life history strategies, and adjustment: A longitudinal study of Oregon youth 1.
Pers Individ Dif.
2016 Jan 1;88:120-124. doi: 10.1016/j.paid.2015.08.052.
Harsh Environments, Life History Strategies, and Adjustment: A Longitudinal 
Study of Oregon Youth.
Hampson SE(1), Andrews JA(1), Barckley M(1), Gerrard M(2), Gibbons FX(2).
Author information:
(1)Oregon Research Institute.
(2)University of Connecticut.
We modeled the effects of harsh environments in childhood on adjustment in early 
emerging adulthood, through parenting style and the development of fast Life 
History Strategies (LHS; risky beliefs and behaviors) in adolescence.
Participants were from the Oregon Youth Substance Use Project (N = 988; 85.7% 
White).
Five cohorts of children in Grades 1-5 at recruitment were assessed 
through one-year post high school.
Greater environmental harshness (neighborhood 
quality and family poverty) in Grades 1-6 predicted less parental investment at 
Grade 8.
This parenting style was related to the development of fast LHS 
(favorable beliefs about substance users and willingness to use substances at 
Grade 9, and engagement in substance use and risky sexual behavior assessed 
across Grades 10-12).
The indirect path from harsh environment through parenting 
and LHS to (less) psychological adjustment (indicated by lower life 
satisfaction, self-rated health, trait sociability, and higher depression) was 
significant (indirect effect -.024, p = .011, 95% CI = -.043, -.006.).
This 
chain of development was comparable to that found by Gibbons et al.
(2012) for 
an African-American sample that, unlike the present study, included perceived 
racial discrimination in the assessment of harsh environment.
DOI: 10.1016/j.paid.2015.08.052
PMCID: PMC4593070
PMID: 26451065
Serum glutamine
 set-shifting ability and anorexia nervosa 1.
Ann Gen Psychiatry.
2010 Jun 25;9:29. doi: 10.1186/1744-859X-9-29.
Serum glutamine, set-shifting ability and anorexia nervosa.
Nakazato M(1), Hashimoto K, Schmidt U, Tchanturia K, Campbell IC, Collier DA, 
Iyo M, Treasure J.
Author information:
(1)Section of Eating Disorders, Institute of Psychiatry, King's College London, 
UK.
michiko.nakazato@nifty.ne.jp.
BACKGROUND: Set-shifting is impaired in people with anorexia nervosa (AN), but 
the underlying physiological and biochemical processes are unclear.
Animal 
studies have established that glutamatergic pathways in the prefrontal cortex 
play an important role in set-shifting ability.
However, it is not yet 
understood whether levels of serum glutamatergic amino acids are associated with 
set-shifting performance in humans.
The aim of this study was to determine 
whether serum concentrations of amino acids related to glutamatergic 
neurotransmission (glutamine, glutamate, glycine, l-serine, d-serine) are 
associated with set-shifting ability in people with acute AN and those after 
recovery.
METHODS: Serum concentrations of glutamatergic amino acids were measured in 27 
women with current AN (AN group), 18 women recovered from AN (ANRec group) and 
28 age-matched healthy controls (HC group).
Set-shifting was measured using the 
Wisconsin Card Sorting Test (WCST) and the Trail Making Task (TMT).
Dimensional 
measures of psychopathology were used, including the Eating Disorder Examination 
Questionnaire (EDEQ), the Maudsley Obsessive-Compulsive Inventory (MOCI) and the 
Hospital Anxiety and Depression Scale (HADS).
RESULTS: Serum glutamine concentrations in the AN group (1,310.2 +/- 265.6 muM, 
mean +/- SD) were significantly higher (by approximately 20%) than those in the 
HC group (1,102.9 +/- 152.7 muM, mean +/- SD) (F(2, 70) = 6.3, P = 0.003, 95% CI 
61.2 to 353.4).
Concentrations of serum glutamine were positively associated 
with markers of the illness severity: a negative correlation was present between 
serum glutamine concentrations and body mass index (BMI) and lowest BMI and a 
positive correlation was found between duration of illness and EDEQ.
The AN 
group showed significantly impaired set shifting in the WCST, both total errors, 
and perseverative errors.
In the AN group, there were no correlations between 
serum glutamine concentrations and set shifting.
CONCLUSIONS: Serum concentrations of glutamine may be a biomarker of illness 
severity in people with AN.
It does not appear to be directly associated with 
changes in executive function.
DOI: 10.1186/1744-859X-9-29
PMCID: PMC2902473
PMID: 20576166
New aspects of the role of serotonin in the insulin release mechanism 1. Acta Diabetol Lat. 1974 Jul-Aug;11(4):315-29. doi: 10.1007/BF02581235.

New aspects of the role of serotonin in the insulin release mechanism.

Baráth P.

DOI: 10.1007/BF02581235
PMID: 4619282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hormonal stimulation of RNA polymerase in mammary gland in vitro 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1969 Jan 21;174(1):291-301. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2787(69)90253-6.

Hormonal stimulation of RNA polymerase in mammary gland in vitro.

Turkington RW
 Ward OT.
DOI: 10.1016/0005-2787(69)90253-6
PMID: 5766297 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of dietary phosphorus concentration and electrolyte balance on the growth performance of broiler chickens 1. Br Poult Sci. 1986 Dec;27(4):601-12. doi: 10.1080/00071668608416919.

Effect of dietary phosphorus concentration and electrolyte balance on the growth 
performance of broiler chickens.

Karunajeewa H
 Barr DA, Fox M.

The performance of 1680 male and female broiler chickens given diets with either 
a low (4.7-4.3 g/kg) or high (8.9-8.2 g/kg) content of inorganic phosphorus and 
four (150, 200, 250 and 300 mEq/kg) electrolyte balances (Na+K-Cl) was measured 
from 1-d-old to 49 d of age.
Diets with the higher concentration of inorganic 
phosphorus reduced body weight gains in the starter (P less than 0.01) and 
finisher (P less than 0.05) phases but the efficiency of food utilisation was 
reduced only in the starter phase (P less than 0.05).
The reduction in body 
weight gain was greater in males than in females.
The growth depression caused 
by the higher concentration of inorganic phosphorus in the finisher diets was 
partially alleviated by increasing the electrolyte balance to either 250 or 300 
mEq/kg diet.
The higher concentration of inorganic phosphorus significantly 
reduced the dressing percentage and increased the abdominal fat pad weight and 
litter moisture content.
Electrolyte balance had no significant effects on 
efficiency of food utilisation, abdominal fat pad weights or litter moisture 
content.
Neither the dietary concentration of phosphorus nor the electrolyte 
balance had a significant effect on mortality or ash content of the tibia.
DOI: 10.1080/00071668608416919
PMID: 3815128 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Continuous mixed venous oxygen saturation
 not mean blood pressure, is associated with early bupivacaine cardiotoxicity in dogs 1.
Can J Anaesth.
2003 Apr;50(4):376-81. doi: 10.1007/BF03021035.
Continuous mixed venous oxygen saturation, not mean blood pressure, is 
associated with early bupivacaine cardiotoxicity in dogs.
[Article in English, French]

Kim JT(1), Rhee KY, Bahk JH, Do SH, Lim YJ, Ko H, Lee KH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesiology and Pain Medicine, College of Medicine, Seoul 
National University, 28 Yongon-Dong, Chongno-Gu, Seoul, Korea 110-774.
Comment in
    Can J Anaesth.
2004 Feb;51(2):189; author reply 189-90. doi: 
10.1007/BF03018786.
PURPOSE: To investigate changes of continuous mixed venous oxygen saturation 
(cSvO(2)) and mean arterial blood pressure (MBP) in dogs with 
bupivacaine-induced cardiac depression.
METHODS: Bupivacaine was infused into pentobarbital-anesthetized mongrel dogs (n 
= 8) at a rate of 0.5 mg.kg(-1).min(-1) until the MBP was 40 mmHg or less (end 
of bupivacaine infusion; BIE).
The infusion time was divided into the early 
period, first 30 min of bupivacaine infusion and the late period, which was from 
30 min of bupivacaine infusion until BIE.
cSvO(2) was monitored using a 
fibreoptic pulmonary artery catheter, and MBP and cardiac output (CO) were 
measured every ten minutes after the initiation of bupivacaine infusion.
Arterial blood gas, serum electrolyte and bupivacaine concentration were 
measured simultaneously.
The relationships between CO and cSvO(2), and of CO vs 
MBP were compared by regression analysis in the early and late periods.
RESULTS: The Pearson's correlation coefficients between CO and cSvO(2) were 
0.782 (P = 2.1 x 10(-7)) in the early period and 0.824 (P = 1.3 x 10(-6)) in the 
late period.
The correlation coefficients between CO and MBP were 0.019 (P = 
0.921) in the early period and 0.799 (P = 4.8 x 10(-6)) in the late period.
CONCLUSIONS: cSvO(2), but not MBP, is associated with CO changes in 
bupivacaine-induced cardiac depression during the early period of bupivacaine 
intoxication.
Decrease of MBP with low cSvO(2) observed during the late period 
might imply severe cardiac depression induced by bupivacaine infusion.
DOI: 10.1007/BF03021035
PMID: 12670815 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Tonic inhibition of small intestinal motility by nitric oxide 1. J Auton Nerv Syst. 1993 Aug-Sep;44(2-3):179-87. doi: 
10.1016/0165-1838(93)90030-x.

Tonic inhibition of small intestinal motility by nitric oxide.

Gustafsson BI(1)
 Delbro DS.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Surgery, University of Göteborg, Sweden.
The effects of blocking nitric oxide synthase with the arginine analog N 
omega-nitro-L-arginine (L-NNA) were investigated in anaesthetized cats, 
vagotomized and pretreated with guanethidine and atropine.
Spontaneous NANC 
jejunal motility (recorded as the volume changes of an intraluminal balloon) was 
markedly increased in a dose-dependent and stereospecific manner.
The effect of 
L-NNA was partly reversed by L-arginine, the substrate for nitric oxide (NO) 
synthesis.
Thus, this study presents evidence for a tonic inhibitory influence, 
via the release of NO, on small intestinal motility in vivo.
Furthermore, 
relaxations upon the L-NNA-induced hypermotility could be elicited by vagal 
nerve stimulation, which may suggest the existence of another NANC inhibitory 
transmitter.
Hexamethonium abolished such relaxations but did not affect the 
tone or phasic activity after L-NNA.
DOI: 10.1016/0165-1838(93)90030-x
PMID: 7693788 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Evidence for involvement of cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase in morphine tolerance. 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 1990 Jan;252(1):104-11.

Evidence for involvement of cyclic GMP phosphodiesterase in morphine tolerance.

Burton CK(1)
 Ho IK, Hoskins B.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Mississippi Medical 
Center, Jackson.
Preliminary evidence had suggested that changes in cyclic GMP (cGMP) hydrolysis 
via cyclic nucleotide phosphodiesterase(s) occurred during development of 
tolerance to morphine.
To examine this finding further and its possible role in 
development of tolerance to morphine, rats (150-175 g) were injected with 1 ml 
of a sustained-release morphine preparation (40 mg/ml).
Control rats received 1 
ml of the oily vehicle.
Antinociception, decreased locomotor activity, 
respiratory depression and mydriasis were measured at various times from 0.5 
through 96 hr of exposure to the drug.
Particulate and soluble cGMP hydrolysis 
were measured for the same time periods from periaqueductal gray (PAG), 
striatum, medulla and oculomotor nucleus, the brain areas believed to mediate 
the respective behaviors.
Each of the behaviors except mydriasis showed 
development of complete tolerance (no difference from control behaviors) during 
the 96 hr of continuous exposure.
During development of tolerance, particulate 
cGMP hydrolysis decreased in PAG and increased in striatum and medulla.
Particulate cGMP hydrolysis was not altered in oculomotor nucleus, the brain 
area mediating mydriasis to which tolerance development was partial or 
incomplete.
Significant changes in soluble cGMP hydrolysis occurred only in PAG 
before decline in the behavioral effect and did not appear to be involved in 
tolerance phenomena.
Modulation of cyclic nucleotide levels by changes in 
particulate cGMP hydrolysis may produce or allow for development of complete 
tolerance to various morphine-induced behaviors.
PMID: 2153795 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A correlation between multiple unit activity in the hypothalamus and electrocardiographic changes during a subarachnoid hemorrhage 1. Brain Res. 1986 May 14;373(1-2):146-52. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(86)90324-0.

A correlation between multiple unit activity in the hypothalamus and 
electrocardiographic changes during a subarachnoid hemorrhage.

Lacy PS
 Earle AM.
A sudden onset and short latency of cardiovascular responses that may follow a 
subarachnoid hemorrhage (SAH) in the vicinity of the circle of Willis implicate 
neural mechanisms.
To investigate this, multi unit activity (MUA) was recorded 
from the posterolateral hypothalamus and electrocardiogram was recorded from 
lead II before and during SAH in rats.
A temporal correlation between MUA, heart 
rate and rhythm changes was observed.
Following SAH, transient depression of MUA 
(approximately 5 s or less) did not affect heart rate; a more sustained 
suppression preceded bradycardia and arrhythmias.
Bradycardia, premature atrial 
contractions and premature ventricular contractions occurred under two 
conditions: when MUA was suppressed; and during bursts in MUA when interburst 
phases were suppressed.
Further evidence that bradycardia may be the result of 
suppression of brain potentials was obtained by failure of bilateral vagotomy, 
atropine and isoproterenol to reverse bradycardia generated after SAH under the 
ventral aspect of the brain in the vicinity of circle of Willis.
However, 
bilateral vagotomy reversed bradycardia after SAH in the cisterna magna 
indicating an activation of central parasympathetic neurons.
The results 
indicate that different neural mechanisms underlie bradycardia generated from 
the above mentioned two sites, namely, ventral brain and cisterna magna.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(86)90324-0
PMID: 2424550 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects on various types of liver catalase by growth of rhodamine sarcoma and by administration of in vivo catalase-depressing substance prepared from the tumor. 1. Gan. 1968 Aug;59(4):317-25.

Effects on various types of liver catalase by growth of rhodamine sarcoma and by 
administration of in vivo catalase-depressing substance prepared from the tumor.

Nakamura T
 Matuo Y, Nishikawa K, Horio T, Okunuki K.

PMID: 5707406 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Distance from source of reward as a marker for extinction-induced “despair”: Modulation by the antidepressants clomipramine and citalopram 1. Neuroscience. 2012 Oct 25;223:152-62. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.07.064.
 Epub 2012 Aug 4.

Distance from source of reward as a marker for extinction-induced "despair": 
modulation by the antidepressants clomipramine and citalopram.

Komorowski M(1)
 Huston JP, Klingenhegel I, Paulat J, Sackers J, Topic B.
Author information:
(1)Center for Behavioral Neuroscience, Heinrich-Heine-University of Düsseldorf, 
Universitätsstr.
1, 40225 Düsseldorf, Germany.
Despair-related withdrawal behaviors are common symptoms of major depression 
(MD) and can be ascribed to a loss or absence of former rewarding events.
Extinction of negatively reinforced escape behavior in the Morris Water Maze has 
been shown to induce despair-like behavior.
A new animal model of 
depressive-like behavior is based on the extinction of positively reinforced 
behavior, which was shown to induce spatial avoidance of the former source of 
reward and biting of the operandum.
Treatment with antidepressants attenuated 
these extinction-induced behaviors, suggesting that they reflect a 
depressive-like state.
Here we present a methodological variation of this 
depression model.
We employed an elongated operant chamber rather than a 
two-compartment procedure with the intent to establish a flowing gradient of 
withdrawal from the source of reward, rather than an all-or-none binary measure.
Furthermore, instead of employing extinction of lever-pressing behavior, we 
applied a cued fixed-time food-delivery schedule.
Sixty adult male Wistar rats 
(n=12/group) were trained to receive a food reward after appearance of a 
cue-light (fixed interval 90s) in an elongated Skinner-box of 72 cm length.
Prior to extinction, the animals were treated for 9 days with either 7.5 or 
10mg/kg of the tricyclic antidepressant clomipramine, 7.5 or 10mg/kg of the 
selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor (SSRI) citalopram or vehicle.
Subsequent 
testing in an open field was carried out to investigate potential effects of the 
antidepressants on locomotor- and anxiety-like behavior.
An overall increase in 
distance from the feeder and biting behavior was found over the course of the 
extinction trials.
Both, citalopram and clomipramine decreased the distance from 
the pellet feeder during the initial extinction trials compared to the 
vehicle-treated group.
The attenuation of withdrawal behavior by the 
antidepressants supports the hypothesis that avoidance/withdrawal behavior 
during extinction trials can serve as a marker for extinction-induced depression 
and suggests the utility of this paradigm as a rodent model of depression.
Copyright © 2012 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2012.07.064
PMID: 22871517 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Spatial memory impairment in Morris water maze after electroconvulsive seizures <jats:sec id="S0924270816000223_abs1" sec-type="general"><jats:title>Objective</jats:title><jats:p>Electroconvulsive therapy (ECT) is one of the most efficient treatments for severe major depression
 but some patients suffer from retrograde memory loss after treatment.
Electroconvulsive seizures (ECS), an animal model of ECT, have repeatedly been shown to increase hippocampal neurogenesis, and multiple ECS treatments cause retrograde amnesia in hippocampus-dependent memory tasks.
Since recent studies propose that addition of newborn hippocampal neurons might degrade existing memories, we investigated whether the memory impairment after multiple ECS treatments is a cumulative effect of repeated treatments, or if it is the result of a delayed effect after a single ECS.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec id="S0924270816000223_abs2" sec-type="methods"><jats:title>Methods</jats:title><jats:p>We used the hippocampus-dependent memory task Morris water maze (MWM) to evaluate spatial memory.
Rats were exposed to an 8-day training paradigm before receiving either a single ECS or sham treatment and tested in the MWM 24 h, 72 h, or 7 days after this treatment, or multiple (four) ECS or sham treatments and tested 7 days after the first treatment.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec id="S0924270816000223_abs3" sec-type="results"><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p>A single ECS treatment was not sufficient to cause retrograde amnesia whereas multiple ECS treatments strongly disrupted spatial memory in the MWM.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec id="S0924270816000223_abs4" sec-type="conclusion"><jats:title>Conclusion</jats:title><jats:p>The retrograde amnesia after multiple ECS is a cumulative effect of repeated treatments rather than a delayed effect after a single ECS.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Neurosteroids
 brain damage, and mental illness 1.
Exp Gerontol.
1998 Nov-Dec;33(7-8):713-27. doi: 10.1016/s0531-5565(98)00039-4.
Neurosteroids, brain damage, and mental illness.
Herbert J(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Anatomy and MRC Cambridge Centre for Brain Repair, University 
of Cambridge, UK.
The steroidal environment of the brain has marked consequences for both its 
structure and function.
Social or physical stress has deleterious results on 
hippocampal function.
This can be replicated by raising corticoids, which are 
also highly responsive to stress.
Corticosterone, the major glucocorticoid in 
the rat, induces neuronal death in primary hippocampal cultures.
Elevated 
corticoids also induce mood changes, and these are well known to be associated 
with stress, particularly chronic stress such as social adversity accentuated by 
intercurrent aversive life events.
DHEA, a second adrenal steroid, has a very 
different developmental history, increasing rapidly during childhood, reaching a 
peak in youth, and declining thereafter in both blood and CSF.
DHEA, in contrast 
to corticoids, has brain protective actions.
It reduces the neurotoxic actions 
of glutamate analogues (such as NMDA) as well as those of corticoids.
Evidence 
from several sources suggests that DHEA can act as an antiglucocorticoid.
DHEA 
levels are reduced in major depressive disorders in both adolescents and adults, 
and a raised cortisol/DHEA ratio (together with intercurrent life events) 
predicts delayed recovery.
DHEA may have a role in the treatment of depression.
Together, these findings suggest that altered steroidal environment, whether 
induced by stress or aging, can have appreciable results on the cellular 
structure of the brain as well as on its function, although links between the 
two sets of findings are still tentative.
DOI: 10.1016/s0531-5565(98)00039-4
PMID: 9951618 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fragile X mental retardation protein replacement restores hippocampal synaptic function in a mouse model of fragile X syndrome 1. Gene Ther. 2009 Sep;16(9):1122-9. doi: 10.1038/gt.2009.83. Epub 2009 Jul 2.

Fragile X mental retardation protein replacement restores hippocampal synaptic 
function in a mouse model of fragile X syndrome.

Zeier Z(1)
 Kumar A, Bodhinathan K, Feller JA, Foster TC, Bloom DC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Molecular Genetics and Microbiology, University of Florida 
College of Medicine, Gainesville, FL 32610-0266, USA.
Fragile X syndrome (FXS) is caused by a mutation that silences the fragile X 
mental retardation gene (FMR1), which encodes the fragile X mental retardation 
protein (FMRP).
To determine whether FMRP replacement can rescue phenotypic 
deficits in a fmr1-knockout (KO) mouse model of FXS, we constructed an 
adeno-associated virus-based viral vector that expresses the major central 
nervous system (CNS) isoform of FMRP.
Using this vector, we tested whether FMRP 
replacement could rescue the fmr1-KO phenotype of enhanced long-term depression 
(LTD), a form of synaptic plasticity that may be linked to cognitive impairments 
associated with FXS.
Extracellular excitatory postsynaptic field potentials were 
recorded from CA3-CA1 synaptic contacts in hippocampal slices from wild-type 
(WT) and fmr1-KO mice in the presence of AP-5 and anisomycin.
Paired-pulse 
low-frequency stimulation (PP-LFS)-induced LTD is enhanced in slices obtained 
from fmr1 KO compared with WT mice.
Analyses of hippocampal synaptic function in 
fmr1-KO mice that received hippocampal injections of vector showed that the 
PP-LFS-induced LTD was restored to WT levels.
These results indicate that 
expression of the major CNS isoform of FMRP alone is sufficient to rescue this 
phenotype and suggest that post-developmental protein replacement may have the 
potential to improve cognitive function in FXS.
DOI: 10.1038/gt.2009.83
PMCID: PMC2741536
PMID: 19571888 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Synaptic scaling mediated by glial TNF-α 1. Nature. 2006 Apr 20;440(7087):1054-9. doi: 10.1038/nature04671. Epub 2006 Mar 
19.

Synaptic scaling mediated by glial TNF-alpha.

Stellwagen D(1)
 Malenka RC.
Author information:
(1)Nancy Pritzker Laboratory, Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, 
Stanford University School of Medicine, Palo Alto, California 94304-5485, USA.
Two general forms of synaptic plasticity that operate on different timescales 
are thought to contribute to the activity-dependent refinement of neural 
circuitry during development: (1) long-term potentiation (LTP) and long-term 
depression (LTD), which involve rapid adjustments in the strengths of individual 
synapses in response to specific patterns of correlated synaptic activity, and 
(2) homeostatic synaptic scaling, which entails uniform adjustments in the 
strength of all synapses on a cell in response to prolonged changes in the 
cell's electrical activity.
Without homeostatic synaptic scaling, neural 
networks can become unstable and perform suboptimally.
Although much is known 
about the mechanisms underlying LTP and LTD, little is known about the 
mechanisms responsible for synaptic scaling except that such scaling is due, at 
least in part, to alterations in receptor content at synapses.
Here we show that 
synaptic scaling in response to prolonged blockade of activity is mediated by 
the pro-inflammatory cytokine tumour-necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha).
Using 
mixtures of wild-type and TNF-alpha-deficient neurons and glia, we also show 
that glia are the source of the TNF-alpha that is required for this form of 
synaptic scaling.
We suggest that by modulating TNF-alpha levels, glia actively 
participate in the homeostatic activity-dependent regulation of synaptic 
connectivity.
DOI: 10.1038/nature04671
PMID: 16547515 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The effect of DOPA and clonidine on reflex pathways from group II muscle afferents to ?-motoneurones in the cat 1. Exp Brain Res. 1988;71(2):442-6. doi: 10.1007/BF00247505.

The effect of DOPA and clonidine on reflex pathways from group II muscle 
afferents to alpha-motoneurones in the cat.

Schomburg ED(1)
 Steffens H.

Author information:
(1)Physiologisches Institut der Universität, Göttingen, Federal Republic of 
Germany.
In high spinal cats the transmission in both disynaptic and polysynaptic reflex 
pathways from group II muscle afferents to motoneurones was effectively 
depressed by DOPA and clonidine together with an often less pronounced 
depression of transmission in other FRA reflex pathways.
The inhibitory effect 
of both drugs on the inhibitory group II and FRA pathways was generally less 
distinct than that on the excitatory ones.
The results are in agreement with 
former observations which suggested that the excitatory and the inhibitory FRA 
pathways are independently controlled by descending pathways from the brain stem 
(Holmqvist and Lundberg 1961).
DOI: 10.1007/BF00247505
PMID: 2844579 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of lymphatic absorption of cholesterol by cholestane-3β
5α,6β-triol 1.
J Lipid Res.
1969 Nov;10(6):694-702.
Inhibition of lymphatic absorption of cholesterol by cholestane-3 beta, 5 alpha, 
6 beta-triol.
Ito M, Connor WE, Blanchette EJ, Treadwell CR, Vahouny GV.
The effect of cholestane-3,5alpha,6-triol (CT) on the intestinal absorption of 
cholesterol and oleic acid, as well as the absorption of labeled CT, was studied 
in lymph ductcannulated rats.
Intragastric administration of 50 mg of CT in an 
emulsion with cholesterol-7alpha-(3)H and oleic acid-1-(14)C resulted in 50% 
inhibition of sterol transfer into lymph but only 8% depression of fatty acid 
absorption over an 8 hr period.
The absorption of labeled CT into lymph was only 
2-3% compared with 50% absorption of cholesterol when each was fed alone.
10% of 
the fed CT was recovered in the intestinal mucosa, and of this, one-half was 
associated with the brush border fraction.
In rats fed CT 6 days prior to 
cholesterol and fatty acid administration, there was no effect on fatty acid 
absorption, while cholesterol absorption was reduced by almost 30%.
When the 
intestinal mucosa from these animals were investigated by electron microscopy, 
it appeared that CT feeding resulted in numerous enlarged mitochondria and a 
marked increase in length of the microvilli.
If animals were allowed to recover 
for 6 days from the CT prefeeding regime, the intestinal mucosa appeared normal, 
and the absorption of cholesterol approached that in controls.
A possible 
mechanism for CT inhibition of cholesterol absorption was shown to be 
competition for the enzyme cholesterol esterase which esterifies cholesterol 
prior to entrance into the lymphatic system.
CT itself is poorly esterified and 
poorly absorbed, but it is effective in inhibiting esterification of cholesterol 
in vitro.
PMID: 5356754 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Absence of Abundant Binding Sites for Anesthetics in Rabbit Brain 1. Anesthesiology. 1990 Sep;73(3):455-60. doi: 10.1097/00000542-199009000-00014.

Absence of abundant binding sites for anesthetics in rabbit brain: an in vivo 
NMR study.

Lockhart SH(1)
 Cohen Y, Yasuda N, Kim F, Litt L, Eger EI 2nd, Chang LH, James 
T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Anesthesia, Univeristy of California School of Medicine, San 
Francisco 94143-0464.
Using magnetic resonance spectroscopy, the authors tested whether cerebral 
concentrations of inhaled anesthetics do not increase proportionately at 
inspired concentrations exceeding 3% 1) because anesthetics bind to and saturate 
specific sites in the brain or 2) because anesthetic-induced depression of 
ventilation limits the increase in alveolar anesthetic partial pressure.
New 
Zealand White rabbits were anesthetized with methohexital, 70% nitrous oxide, 
and local infiltration of 1% lidocaine.
Cerebral concentrations of anesthetic 
were determined from 19F spectra acquired with nuclear magnetic resonance (NMR).
Inspired, end-tidal, and arterial anesthetic concentrations, and end-tidal and 
arterial partial pressure of carbon dioxide were measured.
Blood/gas partition 
coefficients were determined and used to convert arterial anesthetic 
concentration to partial pressures.
In seven spontaneously breathing animals, 
halothane (1%; n = 5) or isoflurane (0.8%; n = 2) was administered at a constant 
inspired concentration for 20 min; NMR spectra were acquired between 10 and 20 
min.
Thereafter, the inspired concentration was increased and the process 
repeated until apnea occurred.
Two additional rabbits were anesthetized with 
isoflurane and studied similarly but with higher inspired concentrations during 
mechanical ventilation.
In spontaneously breathing animals, ventilatory 
depression occurred, documented by marked increases in PaCO2, and cerebral 
concentrations of anesthetic did not increase proportionately at inspired 
concentrations exceeding 3%.
In contrast to an absence of a correlation of 
inspired and cerebral concentrations during spontaneous ventilation, arterial 
and cerebral concentrations correlated linearly during both spontaneous and 
mechanical ventilation (R2 greater than 0.969).
These results are consistent 
with depression of ventilation, rather than binding to specific cerebral sites 
as an explanation for the nonlinear relationship between cerebral and inspired 
anesthetic concentrations.
DOI: 10.1097/00000542-199009000-00014
PMID: 2393130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long-Term Stress Degenerates
 But Imipramine Regenerates, Noradrenergic Axons in the Rat Cerebral Cortex 1.
Biol Psychiatry.
1997 Oct 15;42(8):687-96. doi: 10.1016/s0006-3223(96)00502-1.
Long-term stress degenerates, but imipramine regenerates, noradrenergic axons in 
the rat cerebral cortex.
Kitayama I(1), Yaga T, Kayahara T, Nakano K, Murase S, Otani M, Nomura J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry, Mie University School of Medicine, Japan.
Exposed to a forced walking stress for 2 weeks, some rats became persistently 
inactive (depression-model rats), whereas others gradually recovered from 
exhaustion (spontaneous recovery rats).
We also studied rats exposed to 
short-term stress, rats without stress, and the model rats treated with 
imipramine or saline.
We examined the density of noradrenergic axons in the 
frontal cortex using retrograde labeling of the locus coeruleus with horseradish 
peroxidase injected into the cortex and immunohistochemical staining of cortical 
axons with dopamine beta-hydroxylase antiserum.
The density was significantly 
lower in the depression-model rats, but tended to be higher in the recovery rats 
and short-term stressed rats.
Chronic treatment with imipramine significantly 
increased the density in the model rats.
There was also a correlation between 
the density of noradrenergic axons and the recovery rate of activity.
Our 
results suggest that cortical noradrenergic degeneration is involved in the 
pathogenesis of depression.
DOI: 10.1016/s0006-3223(96)00502-1
PMID: 9325562 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Thyroid hormones regulate anxiety in the male mouse 1. Horm Behav. 2014 Feb;65(2):88-96. doi: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2013.11.008. Epub 2013 
Dec 11.

Thyroid hormones regulate anxiety in the male mouse.

Buras A(1)
 Battle L(1), Landers E(2), Nguyen T(2), Vasudevan N(3).
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Program, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 70118, USA.
(2)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 
70118, USA.
(3)Department of Cell and Molecular Biology, Tulane University, New Orleans, LA 
70118, USA.
Electronic address: nandini@tulane.edu.
Thyroid hormone levels are implicated in mood disorders in the adult human but 
the mechanisms remain unclear partly because, in rodent models, more attention 
has been paid to the consequences of perinatal hypo and hyperthyroidism.
Thyroid 
hormones act via the thyroid hormone receptor (TR) α and β isoforms, both of 
which are expressed in the limbic system.
TR's modulate gene expression via both 
unliganded and liganded actions.
Though the thyroid hormone receptor (TR) 
knockouts and a transgenic TRα1 knock-in mouse have provided us valuable insight 
into behavioral phenotypes such as anxiety and depression, it is not clear if 
this is because of the loss of unliganded actions or liganded actions of the 
receptor or due to locomotor deficits.
We used a hypothyroid mouse model and 
supplementation with tri-iodothyronine (T3) or thyroxine (T4) to investigate the 
consequences of dysthyroid hormone levels on behaviors that denote anxiety.
Our 
data from the open field and the light-dark transition tests suggest that adult 
onset hypothyroidism in male mice produces a mild anxiogenic effect that is 
possibly due to unliganded receptor actions.
T3 or T4 supplementation reverses 
this phenotype and euthyroid animals show anxiety that is intermediate between 
the hypothyroid and thyroid hormone supplemented groups.
In addition, T3 but not 
T4 supplemented animals have lower spine density in the CA1 region of the 
hippocampus and in the central amygdala suggesting that T3-mediated rescue of 
the hypothyroid state might be due to lower neuronal excitability in the limbic 
circuit.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.yhbeh.2013.11.008
PMID: 24333846 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Comparative Electrophysiological Evaluation of Atrial Activation and Sinoatrial Node Function Following Senning and Mustard Procedures: An Experimental Study 1. Ann Thorac Surg. 1983 Dec;36(6):692-9. doi: 10.1016/s0003-4975(10)60281-0.

Comparative electrophysiological evaluation of atrial activation and sinoatrial 
node function following Senning and Mustard procedures: an experimental study.

Marquez-Montes J
 O'Connor F, Burgos R, Hernandez C, Montero C, 
Castillo-Olivares JL.
We compared several electrophysiological variables before and after Mustard and 
Senning procedures in 14 mongrel dogs and made the following three observations.
First, after the Senning operation, the atrial activation in the areas of the 
anterior and middle internodal tracts is undamaged.
After the Mustard procedure, 
however, conduction through the interatrial septum is practically abolished.
Both techniques damage the area of the posterior internodal tract.
On the whole, 
there is greater dispersion of atrial epicardial mapping with the Senning 
operation.
Second, several degrees of depression in the sinus node automatism 
and intraatrial conduction were observed with both techniques.
Third, 
atrioventricular block in various degrees was observed only after the Mustard 
procedure.
The atrioventricular dissociation observed after the Senning 
operation was dependent on sinus pacemaker dysfunction only.
We think that from 
the electrophysiological point of view, the Senning procedure is a valid 
alternative for repair of transposition of the great arteries.
DOI: 10.1016/s0003-4975(10)60281-0
PMID: 6651380 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
American Chemical Society 230th National Meeting. Pain
 anxiety and depression.
1.
IDrugs.
2005 Nov;8(11):880-3.
American Chemical Society 230th National Meeting.
Pain, anxiety and depression.
Ognjenovic M(1), Perry L.

Author information:
(1)Thomson Scientific, Middlesex House, London, UK.
Marica.Ognjenovic@thomson.com

PMID: 16254775 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cyclic AMP plays a critical role in C3a-receptor–mediated regulation of dendritic cells in antigen uptake and T-cell stimulation <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The biochemical basis for complement acting directly on antigen-presenting cells to enhance their function in T-cell stimulation has been unclear. Here we present evidence that engagement of C3a receptor (C3aR) on the surface of dendritic cells (DCs) leads to alterations in the level of intracellular cyclic adenosine monophosphate (cAMP)
 a potent negative regulator of inflammatory cytokines.
C3aR activation-induced depression of cAMP was associated with enhanced capacity of DCs for antigen uptake and T-cell stimulation.
Conversely, C3aR-deficient DCs showed elevation of cAMP and impaired properties for antigen uptake and immune stimulation.
Similarities in the phenotype of C3-deficient and C3aR-deficient DCs suggest that local production of C3 with extracellular metabolism to C3a is an important driver of DC alterations in cAMP.
The finding of a link between complement and adaptive immune stimulation through cAMP offers new insight into how innate and adaptive immunity combine to generate efficient effector and memory responses.</jats:p>
The volume effect of lidocaine on thoracic epidural anesthesia in conscious Beagle dogs 1. Vet Anaesth Analg. 2015 Jul;42(4):414-24. doi: 10.1111/vaa.12232. Epub 2014
Oct  20.

The volume effect of lidocaine on thoracic epidural anesthesia in conscious 
Beagle dogs.

Son WG(1)
 Jang M(1), Jo SM(1), Yoon J(1), Lee I(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Clinical Sciences, College of Veterinary Medicine, 
Seoul National University, Seoul, South Korea.
OBJECTIVE: To evaluate the volume effect of local anesthetic solution on 
thoracic epidural analgesia in dogs.
STUDY DESIGN: Prospective, experimental trial.
ANIMALS: Five healthy adult Beagle dogs weighing 9.7 ± 1.3 kg.
METHODS: A catheter was inserted into the seventh thoracic epidural space using 
a lumbosacral approach, and secured with suture under total intravenous (IV) 
anesthesia with propofol.
Each dog was administered four volume treatments 
(0.05, 0.10, 0.15 and 0.20 mL kg(-1)) of 2% lidocaine via the catheter at 12 
hour intervals.
In every treatment, dogs were re-anesthetized with propofol (6 
mg kg(-1), IV) and isoflurane, and received iohexol at each volume to visualize 
the epidural distribution (ED) through computed tomography.
Three hours after 
epidurography, when dogs had recovered from anesthesia, the appropriate volume 
of lidocaine was injected through the catheter, and sensory blockade (SB) in 
dermatomes was evaluated by pinching with a mosquito forceps.
Results were 
presented as median (range), and the volume effect on ED and SB was analyzed 
with one-way Kruskal-Wallis anova.
RESULTS: In proportion to volumes (0.05, 0.10, 0.15 and 0.20 mL kg(-1)), there 
were significant increases in the extent of ED from 7.4 (5.5-9.0) to 10.4 
(8.0-12.0), 13.2 (12.5-13.0), and 15.2 (13.0-18.0) vertebrae, respectively, p < 
0.001, and in SB from 2.7 (1.0-5.0) to 6.8 (4.5-10.5), 9.9 (6.5-13.0), and 13.1 
(11.0-15.0) dermatomes, respectively, p < 0.001.
Unilateral ED and SB were 
observed in all treatments with various grades, and this distribution was more 
frequent in the low volume treatments.
In the high volume treatments, temporary 
complications including Horner's syndrome, ataxia, paraplegia, depression, 
stupor, and intermittent cough occurred often.
CONCLUSIONS AND CLINICAL RELEVANCE: The increase in volume of local anesthetic 
solution improved SB by resulting in more consistent bilateral dermatome 
blockade as well as an extended blockade.
However, caution should be exerted, as 
higher volume injections of lidocaine caused side effects in all dogs.
© 2014 Association of Veterinary Anaesthetists and the American College of 
Veterinary Anesthesia and Analgesia.
DOI: 10.1111/vaa.12232
PMID: 25327756 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Predicting factors of health-related quality of life in octogenarians: a 3-year follow-up longitudinal study 1. Qual Life Res. 2015 Nov;24(11):2701-11. doi: 10.1007/s11136-015-1004-9. Epub 
2015 May 24.

Predicting factors of health-related quality of life in octogenarians: a 3-year 
follow-up longitudinal study.

Ferrer A(1)(2)
 Formiga F(3)(4), Cunillera O(5)(6), Megido MJ(5)(7), Corbella 
X(3)(4)(8), Almeda J(5)(6)(9); Octabaix Study Group.
Collaborators: Almeda J, Cunillera O, Fernández C, Gil A, Llopart C, Megido MJ, 
Padrós G, Sarró M, Tobella A.
Author information:
(1)Primary Healthcare Centre 'El Plà' CAP-I, CAP - El Plà, Pl.
Felip Alcantara 
s/n, 08980, Sant Feliu de Llobregat, Barcelona, Spain.
aferrer.cp.ics@gencat.cat.
(2)Primary Health Care Research Institute (IDIAP) Jordi Gol, ICS, Barcelona, 
Spain.
aferrer.cp.ics@gencat.cat.
(3)Geriatric Unit, Internal Medicine Service, Hospital Universitari de 
Bellvitge, Barcelona, Spain.
(4)Bellvitge Biomedical Research Institute, IDIBELL, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, 
Spain.
(5)Primary Health Care Research Institute (IDIAP) Jordi Gol, ICS, Barcelona, 
Spain.
(6)Unitat de Suport a la Recerca Metropolitana Sud, Direcció d'Atencío Primària 
Costa de Ponent, ICS, Cornellà de Llobregat, Spain.
(7)Primary Healthcare Centre Just Oliveres, L'Hospitalet de Llobregat, Spain.
(8)Faculty of Medicine and Health Sciences, Universitat Internacional de 
Catalunya, Barcelona, Spain.
(9)CIBER Epidemiologia i Salut Pública (CIBERESP), Barcelona, Spain.
PURPOSE: The proportion of very old people is rising, and so, describing their 
health-related quality of life (HRQoL) is an important point of interest.
The 
aim of this study was to analyse the predictive factors on HRQoL throughout a 
3-year follow-up period, in a community-based cohort of octogenarian people.
METHODS: From 290 subjects aged 85 and over, sociodemographic and geriatric 
data, including levels of frailty phenotype assessment, and HRQoL using the 
EuroQol 5D3L (EQ-5D) instrument were collected.
A longitudinal analysis was 
performed by generalized estimating equations (jointly testing the bivariate 
effect of variables and its time dependence) and regression mixed models to 
evaluate the adjusted effect of variables on HRQoL after a 3-year follow-up.
RESULTS: In the EQ-5D baseline assessment, the average visual analogue 
self-rating scale value was 63.82 (SD ± 19.45), the EQ-5D index was 0.67 (0.34) 
and the most significant issues were pain/discomfort (61.2 %), depression (45.3 
%) and mobility (44.6 %).
The third year index was 0.55 (0.38).
Independent 
predictive factors of a lower HRQoL identified by the regression mixed models 
were female gender (marginal effect ME = -0.101; p = 0.003), being pre-frail (ME 
= -0.142; p = 0.011) or frail (ME = -0.071; p = 0.030), having heart failure (ME 
= -0.081; p = 0.037) and having a high social risk score (ME = -0.020; p = 
0.015).
In contrast, higher functional status (ME = 0.050; p < 0.001) and 
nutritional score (ME = 0.013; p = 0.011) appeared to be predictive factors of 
an enhanced HRQoL.
The adjusted effect of "time of follow-up" had no statistical 
significance.
CONCLUSION: Frail individuals at baseline have a significant lower HRQoL, 
whereas a higher functional status and nutritional status are independent 
predicting factors of an enhanced HRQoL after 3 years of follow-up.
These 
findings may encourage clinicians in order to asses HRQoL.
DOI: 10.1007/s11136-015-1004-9
PMID: 26003314 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of Deletion of Mutant Huntingtin in Steroidogenic Factor 1 Neurons on the Psychiatric and Metabolic Phenotype in the BACHD Mouse Model of Huntington Disease 1. PLoS One. 2014 Oct 1;9(10):e107691. doi: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107691. 
eCollection 2014.

Effects of deletion of mutant huntingtin in steroidogenic factor 1 neurons on 
the psychiatric and metabolic phenotype in the BACHD mouse model of Huntington 
disease.

Baldo B(1)
 Cheong RY(1), Petersén Å(1).
Author information:
(1)Translational Neuroendocrine Research Unit, Department of Experimental 
Medical Science, Lund University, Lund, Sweden.
Psychiatric and metabolic features appear several years before motor 
disturbances in the neurodegenerative Huntington's disease (HD), caused by an 
expanded CAG repeat in the huntingtin (HTT) gene.
Although the mechanisms 
leading to these aspects are unknown, dysfunction in the hypothalamus, a brain 
region controlling emotion and metabolism, has been suggested.
A direct link 
between the expression of the disease causing protein, huntingtin (HTT), in the 
hypothalamus and the development of metabolic and psychiatric-like features have 
been shown in the BACHD mouse model of HD.
However, precisely which circuitry in 
the hypothalamus is critical for these features is not known.
We hypothesized 
that expression of mutant HTT in the ventromedial hypothalamus, an area involved 
in the regulation of metabolism and emotion would be important for the 
development of these non-motor aspects.
Therefore, we inactivated mutant HTT in 
a specific neuronal population of the ventromedial hypothalamus expressing the 
transcription factor steroidogenic factor 1 (SF1) in the BACHD mouse using 
cross-breeding based on a Cre-loxP system.
Effects on anxiety-like behavior were 
assessed using the elevated plus maze and novelty-induced suppressed feeding 
test.
Depressive-like behavior was assessed using the Porsolt forced swim test.
Effects on the metabolic phenotype were analyzed using measurements of body 
weight and body fat, as well as serum insulin and leptin levels.
Interestingly, 
the inactivation of mutant HTT in SF1-expressing neurons exerted a partial 
positive effect on the depressive-like behavior in female BACHD mice at 4 months 
of age.
In this cohort of mice, no anxiety-like behavior was detected.
The 
deletion of mutant HTT in SF1 neurons did not have any effect on the development 
of metabolic features in BACHD mice.
Taken together, our results indicate that 
mutant HTT regulates metabolic networks by affecting hypothalamic circuitries 
that do not involve the SF1 neurons of the ventromedial hypothalamus.
DOI: 10.1371/journal.pone.0107691
PMCID: PMC4182678
PMID: 25271967 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Competing Interests: The authors have declared 
that no competing interests exist.
[The effect of sporofusarin on the cell membranes of isolated perfused liver]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1975 May;79(5):49-53.

[The effect of sporofusarin on the cell membranes of isolated perfused liver].

[Article in Russian]

Pokrovskiĭ AA
 Morozov BV, Kravchenko LV, Tutel'ian VA.

A study was made of the effect of sporofusarin (mycotoxin produced by Fusarium 
Sporotrichiella v. Sporotrichoides) on the functional activity and permeability 
of cell membranes of the isolated perfused rat liver.
Sporofusarin (in the end 
concentration of 5.9 .
10(-5) M) produced a marked depressive effect on the rate 
of bile, formation, urea synthesis and oxygen consumption, and also caused an 
early and marked disturbance of permeability of the lysosomal and plasma 
membranes of hepatocytes (an increase in the activity of the 
enzymes--beta-acetylglucosaminidase, beta-glucuronidase, arylsulfatases A and B, 
beta-galactosidase in the supernatant fluid of liver homogenate and in the 
perfusata).
It is supposed that depression of the functional activity of the 
liver under the effect of sporofusarin resulted from damage of the membrane 
structures of the cell, and, primarily, of lysosomes.
PMID: 1227593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Ethacrynic Acid on Endolymphatic DC Potential 1. Arch Otolaryngol. 1973 Sep;98(3):183-6. doi: 
10.1001/archotol.1973.00780020191010.

Effect of ethacrynic acid on endolymphatic DC potential.

Dilling JM
 Nakashima T, Snow JB Jr.

DOI: 10.1001/archotol.1973.00780020191010
PMID: 4742425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pre- and postsynaptic serotonergic manipulations in an animal model of depression 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1980 Oct;13(4):575-9. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(80)90283-x.

Pre- and postsynaptic serotonergic manipulations in an animal model of 
depression.

Nagayama H
 Hingtgen JN, Aprison MH.
Rats working on a food-reinforced operant schedule and exhibiting behavioral 
depression following administration of D,L-5-hydroxytryptophan (5-HTP) were 
pretreated with one of three drugs: methysergide, fluoxetine, or amitriptyline.
The former two drugs were used to establish a basis for distinguishing between 
pre- and postsynaptic events.
We found that methysergide, a known postsynaptic 
blocker of serotonin, almost completely abolished the depressive effect of 
5-HTP, whereas fluoxetine, a known specific uptake blocker of serotonin, 
potentiated the depressive effect of the 5-hydroxytryptamine (5-HT) precursor.
Amitriptyline, one of the commonly prescribed antidepressive drugs, reduced the 
behavioral depression following 5-HTP by approximately 50%.
These data indicate 
that amitriptyline can act as an antagonist of 5-HT at the postsynaptic 
receptor.
The results of this study, as well as those recently reported from CNS 
membrane binding studies, suggest that the therapeutic effects of some 
antidepressive drugs may be explained by their postsynaptic rather than 
presynaptic properties at central serotonergic receptors.
Thus, these studies 
support the hypothesis that some types of human depression may be primarily due 
to an excess of free 5-HT acting at postsynaptic receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(80)90283-x
PMID: 6968915 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitors display broad selectivity and inhibit multiple carboxylesterases as off-targets 1. Neuropharmacology. 2007 Mar;52(4):1095-105. doi: 
10.1016/j.neuropharm.2006.11.009. Epub 2007 Jan 9.

Fatty acid amide hydrolase inhibitors display broad selectivity and inhibit 
multiple carboxylesterases as off-targets.

Zhang D(1)
 Saraf A, Kolasa T, Bhatia P, Zheng GZ, Patel M, Lannoye GS, 
Richardson P, Stewart A, Rogers JC, Brioni JD, Surowy CS.
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Research, Advanced Technology and Process Research and 
Development, Global Pharmaceutical Research and Development, Abbott 
Laboratories, Abbott Park, IL 60064, USA.
di.zhang@abbott.com

Fatty acid amide hydrolase (FAAH) is the primary regulator of several bioactive 
lipid amides including anandamide.
Inhibitors of FAAH are potentially useful for 
the treatment of pain, anxiety, depression, and other nervous system disorders.
However, FAAH inhibitors must display selectivity for this enzyme relative to 
the numerous other serine hydrolases present in the human proteome in order to 
be therapeutically acceptable.
Here we employed activity-based protein profiling 
(ABPP) to assess the selectivity of FAAH inhibitors in multiple rat and human 
tissues.
We discovered that some inhibitors, including carbamate compounds SA-47 
and SA-72, and AM404 are exceptionally selective while others, like URB597, 
BMS-1, OL-135, and LY2077855 are less selective, displaying multiple 
off-targets.
Since proteins around 60kDa constitute the major off-targets for 
URB597 and several other FAAH inhibitors with different chemical structures, we 
employed the multi-dimensional protein identification technology (MudPIT) 
approach to analyze their identities.
We identified multiple carboxylesterase 
isozymes as bona fide off-targets of FAAH inhibitors.
Consistently, enzymatic 
assay confirmed inhibition of carboxylesterase activities in rat liver by FAAH 
inhibitors.
Since carboxylesterases hydrolyze a variety of ester-containing 
drugs and prodrugs, we speculate that certain FAAH inhibitors, by inhibiting 
carboxylesterases, might have drug-drug interactions with other medicines if 
developed as therapeutic agents.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuropharm.2006.11.009
PMID: 17217969 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Depression of delayed hypersensitivity by pretreatment with Freund-type adjuvants. 3. Depressed arrival of lymphoid cells at recently immunized lymph nodes in mice pretreated with adjuvants. 1. Clin Exp Immunol. 1972 Aug;11(4):579-84.

Depression of delayed hypersensitivity by pretreatment with Freund-type 
adjuvants. 3. Depressed arrival of lymphoid cells at recently immunized lymph 
nodes in mice pretreated with adjuvants.

Allwood GG
 Asherson GL.
Pretreatment of mice with Freund's complete adjuvant (FCA) or Corynebacterium 
parvum depresses the contact sensitivity which otherwise follows immunization 
with picryl chloride in FCA (PCL/FCA).
In contrast, Bordetella pertussis is 
inactive.
The hypothesis that this depression was partly due to the failure of 
lymph nodes immunized with PCL/FCA to collect lymphoid cells was tested.
Mice 
were pretreated with FCA, C. parvum or B. pertussis, subsequently immunized with 
PCL/FCA, and injected with 51Cr-labelled normal lymph node cells.
Pretreatment 
with FCA 10 days before immunization depressed the arrival of labelled cells at 
draining nodes immunized with PCL/FCA by 10–19%.
Pretreatment intravenously with 
C. parvum 4 days before immunization virtually abolished the increased arrival 
at draining lymph nodes which is otherwise seen 2 and 4 days after immunization, 
but had little effect on the increased arrival seen 1 day after immunization.
In 
contrast, B. pertussis caused a slight but significant depression at day 1, but 
had no effect 2 and 4 days after immunization.
The depression of contact 
sensitivity by these three bacterial adjuvants was paralleled by their 
depression of the arrival of labelled lymph node cells at recently immunized 
nodes, and supported the hypothesis that failure of recently immunized lymph 
nodes to collect lymphoid cells is part of the mechanism of depression of 
delayed hypersensitivity by bacterial adjuvants, and in particular, by C. 
parvum.
PMCID: PMC1553693
PMID: 4343615 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The Effects of Venlafaxine and Dexamethasone on the Expression of HSP70 in Rat C6 Glioma Cells 1. Psychiatry Investig. 2010 Mar;7(1):43-8. doi: 10.4306/pi.2010.7.1.43. Epub
2010  Feb 8.

The Effects of Venlafaxine and Dexamethasone on the Expression of HSP70 in Rat 
C6 Glioma Cells.

Yu J(1)
 Roh S, Lee JS, Yang BH, Choi MR, Chai YG, Kim SH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neuropsychiatry, Konkuk University School of Medicine, Seoul, 
Korea.
OBJECTIVE: The present study aimed to determine the intracellular action of the 
antidepressant, venlafaxine, in C6 glioma cells using heat shock protein 70 
(HSP70) immunocytochemistry and HSP70 Western blots; HSP70 is known to be 
associated with stress and depression.
METHODS: The extent of HSP70 expression was measured after rat C6 glioma cells 
were treated with 1) dexamethasone only, 2) venlafaxine only, 3) simultaneous 
venlafaxine and dexamethasone, or 4) dexamethasone after venlafaxine 
pretreatment.
Dexamethasone (10 microM, 6 hours) did not affect the level of 
HSP70 expression relative to control.
RESULTS: Short-term (1 hour) venlafaxine treatment significantly increased the 
level of HSP 70 expression.
Simultaneous long-term (72 hours) venlafaxine and 
dexamethasone treatment significantly reduced the level of HSP70 expression.
Dexamethasone treatment administered following long-term (24 and 72 hours) 
pretreatment with venlafaxine also significantly reduced the level of HSP70 
expression.
CONCLUSION: Short-term treatment with venlafaxine increases the expression of 
HSP70, but prolonged treatment with dexamethasone suppresses the 
venlafaxine-induced expression of HSP70.
These findings suggest that HSP70 and 
dexamethasone play a significant role in the pathophysiology of depression.
DOI: 10.4306/pi.2010.7.1.43
PMCID: PMC2848765
PMID: 20396432
Circling and consumatory behavior induced by striatal and neocortical spreading depression 1. Physiol Behav. 1977 Nov;19(5):673-7. doi: 10.1016/0031-9384(77)90042-7.

Circling and consumatory behavior induced by striatal and neocortical spreading 
depression.

Jakobartl L
 Huston JP.
Single waves of spreading depression (SD) were induced in freely moving Sprague 
Dawley rats by microinjection of KCl solution into either neocortex or caudate 
nucleus.
DC recordings of slow potential changes (SPC) revealed that a wave of 
SD propagates from the neocortex to the caudate nucleus in only a very few cases 
(12.5% of trials, involving 4.3% of the SPC waves).
This result contrasts with 
earlier reported higher incidences of neocortical-striatal transmission of SD, 
and suggests that such transmission may vary across rat strains.
Invasion of the 
caudate nucleus by a wave of neocortical SD was accompanied by contralateral 
circling in 50% of the cases.
Similarly, SD induced by injection of KCl into the 
striatum was accompanied by circling in 43% of trials.
It was also found that 
neocortical SD-induced feeding generally occurred only upon recovery of 
neocortex from the slow potential negativity, and that invasion of the caudate 
nucleus by SD is not involved in the elicited feeding phenomenon.
DOI: 10.1016/0031-9384(77)90042-7
PMID: 605176 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Inhibition of acetamide-45 on airway smooth muscle contraction induced by electric field stimulation and methacholine in vitro]. 1. Zhejiang Da Xue Xue Bao Yi Xue Ban. 2005 Mar;34(2):137-40. doi: 
10.3785/j.issn.1008-9292.2005.02.009.

[Inhibition of acetamide-45 on airway smooth muscle contraction induced by 
electric field stimulation and methacholine in vitro].

[Article in Chinese]

Lu YB(1)
 Chen Z, Lai XY, Gao Y.
Author information:
(1)College of Medicine, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou 310031, China.
OBJECTIVE: To investigate the effects of the new antiallergic agent 
N-(pyridin-4-yl)-(indol-3-yl) acetamide-45 (acetamide-45) on electric field 
stimulation (EFS)-and methacholine-induced contraction of airway smooth muscle 
in vitro.
METHODS: Contractions were induced by EFS in isolated trachea and bronchus of 
rats or by cumulative methacholine concentrations in isolated trachea of guinea 
pigs.
Changes in isometric force of isolated airway smooth muscle were measured 
by force transducers and recorded on a multi-channel polygraph recorder.
RESULTS: Acetamide-45 inhibited the contraction induced by EFS in isolated rat 
airway.
The IC50 was 10.74 (95% CI 8.87-13.00) micromol.L(-1) and 18.83 (95% CI 
14.57-24.33) micromol.L(-1) in tracheae and bronchi, respectively.
Acetamide-45 
also inhibited methacholine-induced contractile response of isolated guinea pig 
trachea in a concentration-dependent manner.
At concentrations of 3, 10, 30 
micromol.L(-1) acetamide-45 significantly decreased maximal contractile response 
of methacholine by 24.6%-43.2% and increased EC50 of methacholine by 3.1-to 
21.4-fold.
CONCLUSION: Acetamide-45 inhibits EFS-or methacholine-induced contraction of 
isolated airway smooth muscle, and these effects might be non-specific 
inhibition on cholinergic receptor.
DOI: 10.3785/j.issn.1008-9292.2005.02.009
PMID: 15812887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Thyrotropin on Iodide Efflux in FRTL-5 Cells Mediated by Ca<sup>2+</sup> 1. Endocrinology. 1984 Apr;114(4):1108-13. doi: 10.1210/endo-114-4-1108.

Effect of thyrotropin on iodide efflux in FRTL-5 cells mediated by Ca2+.

Weiss SJ
 Philp NJ, Grollman EF.
A functioning rat thyroid cell line (FRTL-5) responds acutely to the addition of 
TSH, norepinephrine, and the Ca2+ ionophore A23187 by a depression in iodide 
(I-) uptake levels.
The decrease in I- content measured at the steady state 
depends on the presence of external Ca2+ and can be accounted for by an effect 
on stimulated I- efflux.
As contrasted to the prolonged time (hours and days) 
involved in the stimulatory effect of TSH on I- uptake, the acute response to 
TSH is 1) seen within 5 min and maintained for about 20 min, 2) maximum, at a 1 
X 10(-7)M concentration of TSH compared with the concentration of 1 X 10(-9)M 
necessary for the stimulatory effect, 3) independent of whether the cells are 
growing in the presence or absence of TSH, and 4) not mimicked by the addition 
of (Bu)2cAMP.
The results suggest that TSH and adrenergic stimulation lead to 
increased membrane permeability to I- which is mediated by an elevation in the 
intracellular Ca2+ concentration.
DOI: 10.1210/endo-114-4-1108
PMID: 6323130 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Feasibility of simultaneous cognitive behavioral therapy and left prefrontal rTMS for treatment resistant depression 1. Brain Stimul. 2010 Oct;3(4):207-10. doi: 10.1016/j.brs.2010.03.005. Epub 2010 
Apr 15.

Feasibility of simultaneous cognitive behavioral therapy and left prefrontal 
rTMS for treatment resistant depression.

Vedeniapin A(1)
 Cheng L, George MS.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Behavioral Sciences, Medical University of South 
Carolina, Charleston, South Carolina 29425, USA.
vedeniap@musc.edu

DOI: 10.1016/j.brs.2010.03.005
PMCID: PMC2962866
PMID: 20965449 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Molecular Signaling Pathways that Link Depression and Heart Disease 1. Postgrad Med. 2003 Dec;114(6 Suppl Managing Depression):14-27. doi: 
10.3810/pgm.12.2003.suppl32.192.

Molecular signaling pathways that link depression and heart disease.

Finkel MS(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Medicine
 West Virginia University School of Medicine, 
Morgantown, WV 26506-9157, USA.
mfinkel@hsc.wvu.edu

Patients with clinical depression and coronary artery disease (CAD) risk factors 
have chronic, persistent activation of potentially toxic mediators optimized for 
short-term survival from ischemia, infection, and hemorrhage.
The mediators and 
pathways involved in these processes are beginning to be elucidated.
This basic 
research has uncovered novel potential therapeutic targets to prevent or 
attenuate adverse cardiovascular consequences of clinical depression.
Well-designed randomized controlled studies will be required to definitively 
demonstrate that treating depression decreases cardiac mortality and morbidity.
The results of controlled clinical trials support the use of selective serotonin 
reuptake inhibitors (SSRIs) for patients with CAD.
The possibility that the use 
of an SSRI may confer additional benefit through a platelet inhibitory effect 
independent of the level of depression warrants further investigation.
DOI: 10.3810/pgm.12.2003.suppl32.192
PMID: 19667661 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A comprehensive electrographic and behavioral analysis of generalized tonic-clonic seizures of GEPR-9s 1. Brain Res. 2005 Feb 1;1033(1):1-12. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.10.066.

A comprehensive electrographic and behavioral analysis of generalized 
tonic-clonic seizures of GEPR-9s.

Moraes MF(1)
 Chavali M, Mishra PK, Jobe PC, Garcia-Cairasco N.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biomedical and Therapeutic Sciences, University of Illinois 
College of Medicine at Peoria, USA.
This study records noise-free intracerebral EEG of the genetically epilepsy 
prone rat (GEPR-9), along with behavioral correlates, during a seizure on 
unanesthetized freely behaving unrestrained animals.
The GEPR-9 exhibits 
acoustically triggered generalized tonic-clonic seizures, and often times the 
EEG, recorded with conventional techniques, has resulted in data with imbedded 
movement artifact.
For noise-free video-EEG recordings, we used a previously 
developed system that consists of a head connector with a FET preamplifier and 
battery, signal conditioning device (5000x gain, 1 Hz-100 Hz filters), A/D 
converter and video/PC-PC/video computer boards for recording image data.
Each 
animal was implanted with three monopolar/referential electrodes chosen among 
the following areas: cortex, inferior colliculus, reticular formation and caudal 
medulla.
The video-EEG data were quite similar for all recorded animals: (1) 
basal desynchronized EEG before sound stimulus; (2) increase in EEG frequency 
after stimulus and before seizure onset; (3) high-amplitude polyspikes during 
massive myoclonic thrusts with or without a very fast running episode; (4) an 
electrodecremental response during tonic extension; (5) wave and spike complex 
during forelimb and hindlimb tonic rigidity and posttonic clonus; (6) 
low-amplitude EEG during postictal depression.
Time sequenced spectral analysis 
also highlights the epileptiform EEG pattern during seizure with high 
reproducibility between animals.
While testing seizure naive GEPR-9s, there was 
a clear evolution from modest epileptiform EEG activity on the first acoustic 
stimulation to progressively higher amplitude, duration and frequency 
epileptiform EEG activity throughout seizure repetition.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2004.10.066
PMID: 15680333 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Puromycin inhibition of cholesterol absorption in the rat 1. J Lipid Res. 1977 Nov;18(6):745-52.

Puromycin inhibition of cholesterol absorption in the rat.

Vahouny GV
 Ito M, Blendermann EM, Gallo LL, Treadwell CR.
The effect of puromycin on the intestinal absorption of cholesterol has been 
studied in rats with indwelling catheters in the left thoracic lymphatic duct.
Puromycin administration to female rats produced a marked depression of 
cholesterol absorption under conditions where the absorption of simultaneously 
administered fatty acid was also dramatically inhibited.
The same treatment of 
male rats also produced a significant depression in cholesterol absorption, but 
was without effect on absorption of the fatty acid.
Despite the depressions of 
lipid absorption in puromycin-treated animals, there was no accumlation of 
either cholesterol or fatty acid in the intestinal mucosa of either sex.
Actinomycin D treatment of fasting male and female rats, receiving constant 
infusions of saline, had no effect on the rate of lymph production.
This suggest 
that altered lymph production was not responsible for the depressed lipid 
absorption observed in fed animals treated with protein synthesis inhibitors.
The selective inhibition of cholesterol absorption in male rats also precludes 
the possibility that the major effect of the inhibitor is on delayed gastric 
emptying.
PMID: 925518 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Analysis of a Metalloporphyrin Antioxidant Mimetic (MnTE-2-PyP) as a Radiomitigator: Prostate Tumor and Immune Status <jats:p> Due to radiation-induced immune depression and development of pathologies such as cancer
 there is increasing urgency to identify radiomitigators that are effective when administered after radiation exposure.
The main goal of this study was to determine the radiomitigation capacity of MnTE-2-PyP[Mn(III) tetrakis (N-ethylpyridinium-2-yl) porphyrin], a superoxide dismutase (SOD) mimetic, and evaluate leukocyte parameters in spleen and blood.
C57BL/6 mice were total-body exposed to 2 Gy γ-rays (Co-60), i.e., well below a lethal dose, followed by subcutaneous implantation of 5 × 10<jats:sup>5</jats:sup> RM-9 prostate tumor cells and initiation of MnTE-2-PyP treatment (day 0); interval between each procedure was 1–2 h. The drug was administered daily (12 times).
Tumor progression was monitored and immunological analyses were performed on a subset per group on day 12.
Animals treated with MnTE-2-PyP alone had significantly slower tumor growth compared to mice that did not receive the drug (P &lt; 0.05), while radiation alone had no effect.
Treatment of tumor-bearing mice with MnTE-2-PyP alone significantly increased spleen mass relative to body mass; the numbers of splenic white blood cells (WBC) and lymphocytes (B and T), as well as circulating WBC, granulocytes, and platelets, were high compared to one of more of the other groups (P &lt; 0.05).
The results show that MnTE-2-PyP slowed RM-9 tumor progression and up-regulated immune parameters, but mitigation of the effects of 2 Gy total-body irradiation were minimal.
</jats:p>
Cardiovascular response to hemorrhage after alcohol in dogs. 1. Q J Stud Alcohol. 1972 Jun;33(2):464-75.

Cardiovascular response to hemorrhage after alcohol in dogs.

Reves JG
 Newman WH.
PMID: 5064203 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Functional restructuring of the bush-like receptor during the suppression of anaerobic glycolysis]. 1. Biull Eksp Biol Med. 1989 Apr;107(4):486-8.

[Functional restructuring of the bush-like receptor during the suppression of 
anaerobic glycolysis].

[Article in Russian]

Lukashin VG
 Vshivtseva VV, Zamuraev IN.
The bush-like receptors of frog's bladder have been investigated simultaneously 
by vital microscopic, and spectrophotometric studies and registration of 
biopotentials.
It is demonstrated that electrogenic function of receptors is 
suppressed by monoiodacetate and anoxia more rapidly than without 
monoiodacetate.
At the same time reducing of methylene blue into receptors is 
accelerated.
This demonstrates a damage of power metabolism of sensory 
terminals.
It is suggested that the changes result from blockade of anaerobic 
glycolysis being an alternative way for power maintenance of receptor function 
under anoxia.
PMID: 2785827 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Early Life Stress Alters Adult Serotonin 2C Receptor Pre-mRNA Editing and Expression of the α Subunit of the Heterotrimeric G-Protein Gq <jats:p>Infant maternal separation
 a paradigm of early life stress in rodents, elicits long-lasting changes in gene expression that persist into adulthood.
In BALB/c mice, an inbred strain with spontaneously elevated anxiety and stress reactivity, infant maternal separation led to increased depression-like behavioral responses to adult stress and robustly increased editing of serotonin 2C receptor pre-mRNA.
Chronic fluoxetine treatment of adult BALB/c mice exposed to early life stress affected neither their behavioral responses to stress nor their basal 5-HT<jats:sub>2C</jats:sub>pre-mRNA editing phenotype.
However, when fluoxetine was administered during adolescence, depression-like behavioral responses to stress were significantly diminished in these mice, and their basal and stress-induced 5-HT<jats:sub>2C</jats:sub>pre-mRNA editing phenotypes were significantly lower.
Moreover, when BALB/c mice exposed to early life stress were raised in an enriched postweaning environment, their depression-like behavioral responses to adult stress were also significantly diminished.
However, their 5-HT<jats:sub>2C</jats:sub>pre-mRNA editing phenotype remained unaltered.
Hence, the similar behavioral effects of enrichment and fluoxetine treatment during adolescence were not accompanied by similar changes in 5-HT<jats:sub>2C</jats:sub>pre-mRNA editing.
Enriched and nonenriched BALB/c mice exposed to early life stress also exhibited significantly increased expression of mRNA and protein encoding the Gαq subunit of G-protein that couples to 5-HT<jats:sub>2A/2C</jats:sub>receptors.
In contrast, Gαq expression levels were significantly lower in fluoxetine-treated mice.
These findings suggest that compensatory changes in Gαq expression occur in mice with persistently altered 5-HT<jats:sub>2C</jats:sub>pre-mRNA editing and provide an explanation for the dissociation between 5-HT<jats:sub>2C</jats:sub>receptor editing phenotypes and behavioral stress responses.</jats:p>
Anhedonia in postpartum rats 1. Physiol Behav. 2010 Jan 12;99(1):59-66. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.10.011.

Anhedonia in postpartum rats.

Navarre BM(1)
 Laggart JD, Craft RM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Washington State University, Pullman, WA, 
99164-4820, USA.
Postpartum depression (PPD) is a debilitating illness, yet little is known about 
its causes.
The purpose of this study was to examine a major symptom of 
depression during the postpartum period, anhedonia, by comparing sucrose 
preference in female rats that had undergone actual pregnancy or 
hormone-simulated pregnancy (HSP) to their respective controls.
Whereas HSP rats 
showed significantly less preference than vehicle control rats for 1% sucrose 
solution during the first three weeks of the "postpartum" period, previously 
pregnant females showed only slightly depressed sucrose preference for the first 
1-2 days postpartum, compared to non-pregnant controls.
Habituation to 1% 
sucrose during the pregnancy period, which increased preference upon later 
testing in previously pregnant rats tested on postpartum day 2, did not 
significantly increase preference in HSP rats, suggesting that depressed 
preference in the latter group was not due to neophobia.
Pre-treatment with 
desipramine did not prevent suppressed sucrose preference in HSP rats, and 
preference was even further suppressed following chronic sertraline treatment.
These results suggest that estradiol withdrawal following HSP may cause 
anhedonia during the early "postpartum" period.
In contrast, females that have 
undergone actual pregnancy are less likely to show this effect, suggesting that 
postpartum hormonal changes other than the dramatic decline in estradiol may 
buffer its negative mood effects.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2009.10.011
PMCID: PMC2795085
PMID: 19850056 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of therapy with azathioprine and prednisolone and ultraviolet irradiation on mouse skin immune function and immune cell markers <jats:title>Summary</jats:title><jats:p>The effects of ultraviolet irradiation (UVI) (290–400 nm) and/or systemic immunosuppressive drug therapy (azathioprine and prednisolone) on the immunocompetence of the skin of hairless (HRA/Skh‐1) mice were investigated. Mice were studied for the density of ATPase<jats:sup>+</jats:sup>
 la <jats:sup>+</jats:sup> and Thyl·2<jats:sup>+</jats:sup> cells in the dorsal epidermis and contact hypersensitivity (CH) of skin to dinitrofluorobenzene (DNFB).
Prednisolone therapy alone and UVI alone each reduced the densities of the three skin immune cell markers and CH responsiveness; azathioprine therapy alone had no such effects.
When a suberythemal dose of UVI that Induced a moderately depressive effect on these two skin parameters was used, additional azathioprine therapy produced no further depression; additional prednisolone therapy further depressed the densities of ATPase <jats:sup>+</jats:sup> and Ia <jats:sup>+</jats:sup> cells and CH responsiveness; additional therapy with combined azathioprine and prednisolone induced profound depression of the incidences of the three immune cell markers and of CH responsiveness.
These data point to interaction between azathioprine/prednisolone therapy and UVI in depressing local immune function within skin which may contribute to the increased susceptibility of the sun‐exposed skin of immunosuppressed kidney transplant recipients to infective and carcinogenic processes.</jats:p>
The Prodrug 4-Chlorokynurenine Causes Ketamine-Like Antidepressant Effects
 but Not Side Effects, by NMDA/GlycineB-Site Inhibition 1.
J Pharmacol Exp Ther.
2015 Oct;355(1):76-85. doi: 10.1124/jpet.115.225664.
Epub  2015 Aug 11.
The Prodrug 4-Chlorokynurenine Causes Ketamine-Like Antidepressant Effects, but 
Not Side Effects, by NMDA/GlycineB-Site Inhibition.
Zanos P(1), Piantadosi SC(1), Wu HQ(1), Pribut HJ(1), Dell MJ(1), Can A(1), 
Snodgrass HR(1), Zarate CA Jr(1), Schwarcz R(1), Gould TD(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry (P.Z., S.C.P., H.-Q.W., H.J.P., M.J.D., A.C., R.S., 
T.D.G.
), Maryland Psychiatric Research Center (H.-Q.W., R.S.
), Department of 
Pharmacology (R.S., T.D.G.
), Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology (T.D.G.
), 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; VistaGen 
Therapeutics, Inc., San Francisco, California (H.R.S.
); Experimental 
Therapeutics and Pathophysiology Branch, Intramural Research Program, National 
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
(C.A.Z.).
(2)Department of Psychiatry (P.Z., S.C.P., H.-Q.W., H.J.P., M.J.D., A.C., R.S., 
T.D.G.
), Maryland Psychiatric Research Center (H.-Q.W., R.S.
), Department of 
Pharmacology (R.S., T.D.G.
), Department of Anatomy and Neurobiology (T.D.G.
), 
University of Maryland School of Medicine, Baltimore, Maryland; VistaGen 
Therapeutics, Inc., San Francisco, California (H.R.S.
); Experimental 
Therapeutics and Pathophysiology Branch, Intramural Research Program, National 
Institute of Mental Health, National Institutes of Health, Bethesda, Maryland 
(C.A.Z.)
gouldlab@me.com.
Currently approved antidepressant drug treatment typically takes several weeks 
to be effective.
The noncompetitive N-methyl-d-aspartate (NMDA) receptor 
antagonist ketamine has shown efficacy as a rapid-acting treatment of 
depression, but its use is associated with significant side effects.
We assessed 
effects following blockade of the glycineB co-agonist site of the NMDA receptor, 
located on the GluN1 subunit, by the selective full antagonist 
7-chloro-kynurenic acid (7-Cl-KYNA), delivered by systemic administration of its 
brain-penetrant prodrug 4-chlorokynurenine (4-Cl-KYN) in mice.
Following 
administration of 4-Cl-KYN, 7-Cl-KYNA was promptly recovered extracellularly in 
hippocampal microdialysate of freely moving animals.
The behavioral responses of 
the animals were assessed using measures of ketamine-sensitive antidepressant 
efficacy (including the 24-hour forced swim test, learned helplessness test, and 
novelty-suppressed feeding test).
In these tests, distinct from fluoxetine, and 
similar to ketamine, 4-Cl-KYN administration resulted in rapid, dose-dependent 
and persistent antidepressant-like effects following a single treatment.
The 
antidepressant effects of 4-Cl-KYN were prevented by pretreatment with glycine 
or the α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid (AMPA) receptor 
antagonist 2,3-dihydroxy-6-nitro-7-sulfamoyl-benzo[f]quinoxaline-2,3-dione 
(NBQX).
4-Cl-KYN administration was not associated with the rewarding and 
psychotomimetic effects of ketamine, and did not induce locomotor sensitization 
or stereotypic behaviors.
Our results provide further support for antagonism of 
the glycineB site for the rapid treatment of treatment-resistant depression 
without the negative side effects seen with ketamine or other channel-blocking 
NMDA receptor antagonists.
Copyright © 2015 by The American Society for Pharmacology and Experimental 
Therapeutics.
DOI: 10.1124/jpet.115.225664
PMCID: PMC4576668
PMID: 26265321 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of Synaptosomal Uptake of 3H-L-glutamate and 3H-GABA by Hyperforin
 a Major Constituent of St. John's Wort The Role of Amiloride Sensitive Sodium Conductive Pathways 1.
Neuropsychopharmacology.
2000 Aug;23(2):188-97. doi: 
10.1016/S0893-133X(00)00102-0.
Inhibition of synaptosomal uptake of 3H-L-glutamate and 3H-GABA by hyperforin, a 
major constituent of St. John's Wort: the role of amiloride sensitive sodium 
conductive pathways.
Wonnemann M(1), Singer A, Müller WE.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Biocenter Niederursel, University of Frankfurt, 
Frankfurt, Germany.
Extracts of St. John's Wort are widely used for the treatment of depressive 
disorders.
The active principles have not yet been finally elucidated.
We have 
recently shown that hyperforin, a major active constituent of St. John's Wort, 
not only inhibits the neuronal uptake of serotonin, norepinephrine and dopamine, 
but also that of L-glutamate and GABA.
No other antidepressant compound exhibits 
a similar broad uptake inhibiting profile.
To investigate this unique kind of 
property, kinetic analyses were performed regarding the uptake of 3H-L-glutamate 
and 3H-GABA into synaptosomal preparations of mouse brain.
Michaelis-Menten 
kinetics revealed a reduction of Vmax (8.27 to 1.80 pmol/mg/min for 
3H-L-glutamate, 2.76 to 0.77 pmol/mg/min for 3H-GABA) while Km was nearly 
unchanged in both cases, suggesting non-competitive inhibition.
The unselective 
uptake inhibition by hyperforin could be mimicked by the Na+-ionophore monensin 
and by the Na+-K+-ATPase inhibitor ouabain.
However, both mechanisms can be 
discarded for hyperforin.
Several amiloride derivatives known to affect sodium 
conductance significantly enhance 3H-GABA and 3H-L-glutamate uptake and inhibit 
the uptake inhibition by hyperforin, while monensin or ouabain inhibition were 
not influenced.
Selective concentrations of benzamil for amiloride sensitive 
Na+-channels and selective concentrations of 5'-ethylisopropylamiloride (EIPA) 
for the Na+-H+-exchangers both had an attenuating effect on the hyperforin 
inhibition of L-glutamate uptake, suggesting a possible role of amiloride 
sensitive Na+-channels and Na+-H+-exchangers in the mechanism of action of 
hyperforin.
DOI: 10.1016/S0893-133X(00)00102-0
PMID: 10882845 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Factors influencing psychological distress during a disease epidemic: Data from Australia's first outbreak of equine influenza 1. BMC Public Health. 2008 Oct 3;8:347. doi: 10.1186/1471-2458-8-347.

Factors influencing psychological distress during a disease epidemic: data from 
Australia's first outbreak of equine influenza.

Taylor MR(1)
 Agho KE, Stevens GJ, Raphael B.
Author information:
(1)Science of Mental Health and Adversity Unit, School of Medicine, University 
of Western Sydney, Australia.
melanie.taylor@uws.edu.au

BACKGROUND: In 2007 Australia experienced its first outbreak of highly 
infectious equine influenza.
Government disease control measures were put in 
place to control, contain, and eradicate the disease; these measures included 
movement restrictions and quarantining of properties.
This study was conducted 
to assess the psycho-social impacts of this disease, and this paper reports the 
prevalence of, and factors influencing, psychological distress during this 
outbreak.
METHODS: Data were collected using an online survey, with a link directed to the 
affected population via a number of industry groups.
Psychological distress, as 
determined by the Kessler 10 Psychological Distress Scale, was the main outcome 
measure.
RESULTS: In total, 2760 people participated in this study.
Extremely high levels 
of non-specific psychological distress were reported by respondents in this 
study, with 34% reporting high psychological distress (K10 > 22), compared to 
levels of around 12% in the Australian general population.
Analysis, using 
backward stepwise binary logistic regression analysis, revealed that those 
living in high risk infection (red) zones (OR = 2.00; 95% CI: 1.57-2.55; p < 
0.001) and disease buffer (amber) zones (OR = 1.83; 95% CI: 1.36-2.46; p < 
0.001) were at much greater risk of high psychological distress than those 
living in uninfected (white zones).
Although prevalence of high psychological 
distress was greater in infected EI zones and States, elevated levels of 
psychological distress were experienced in horse-owners nationally.
Statistical 
analysis indicated that certain groups were more vulnerable to high 
psychological distress; specifically younger people, and those with lower levels 
of formal educational qualifications.
Respondents whose principal source of 
income was from horse-related industry were more than twice as likely to have 
high psychological distress than those whose primary source of income was not 
linked to horse-related industry (OR = 2.23; 95% CI: 1.82-2.73; p < 0.001).
CONCLUSION: Although, methodologically, this study had good internal validity, 
it has limited generalisability because it was not possible to identify, bound, 
or sample the target population accurately.
However, this study is the first to 
collect psychological distress data from an affected population during such a 
disease outbreak and has potential to inform those involved in assessing the 
potential psychological impacts of human infectious diseases, such as pandemic 
influenza.
DOI: 10.1186/1471-2458-8-347
PMCID: PMC2571100
PMID: 18831770 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Nicotine
 but not mecamylamine, enhances antidepressant-like effects of citalopram and reboxetine in the mouse forced swim and tail suspension tests 1.
Behav Brain Res.
2009 Jan 30;197(1):150-6. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2008.08.016.
Epub  2008 Aug 22.
Nicotine, but not mecamylamine, enhances antidepressant-like effects of 
citalopram and reboxetine in the mouse forced swim and tail suspension tests.
Andreasen JT(1), Redrobe JP.
Author information:
(1)Department of Affective Disorders, Neurosearch A/S, 93 Pederstrupvej, DK-2750 
Ballerup, Denmark.
Current literature suggests that nicotinic acetylcholine receptors (nAChRs) are 
involved in major depression.
In rodents, antidepressant-like effects of both 
nicotine and the non-selective nAChR antagonist mecamylamine have been reported.
Nicotine increases serotonergic and noradrenergic neuronal activity and 
facilitates serotonin and noradrenaline release.
Thus, we hypothesise that 
nicotine may enhance the behavioural effects of serotonin (e.g., citalopram) 
and/or noradrenaline (e.g., reboxetine) reuptake inhibitors.
Here, we tested if 
nicotine enhanced the activity of citalopram or reboxetine in the mouse forced 
swim test (mFST) and the mouse tail suspension test (mTST).
The potential for 
mecamylamine to augment antidepressant drug action was also investigated.
Sub-threshold and threshold doses of citalopram (3 and 10mg/kg) or reboxetine 
(3, 10 and 20mg/kg) were tested alone and in combination with nicotine (0.3 and 
1.0mg/kg) and mecamylamine (1 and 3mg/kg).
Locomotor activity experiments were 
performed to rule out non-specific stimulant effects.
Nicotine (1.0mg/kg) 
enhanced the effect of 10mg/kg citalopram and 20mg/kg reboxetine in the mFST.
Similarly, nicotine (1.0mg/kg) enhanced the effect of 3 and 10mg/kg citalopram 
and 3 and 10mg/kg reboxetine in the mTST.
No concomitant locomotor stimulation 
was observed at the tested dose combinations.
Mecamylamine was effective on its 
own in some tests, but did not augment the effects of citalopram or reboxetine 
at the doses tested.
The data show that nicotine enhances the effects of both 
serotonin and noradrenaline reuptake inhibitors, possibly reflecting nicotine's 
facilitating effects on the release of these two neurotransmitters, and 
indicating that nicotine may enhance antidepressant action.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2008.08.016
PMID: 18786574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antifertility Effect of 17<i>α</i>-Methyl- B-nortestosterone (SK&amp;F 7690)<sup>1</sup> 1. Endocrinology. 1969 Nov;85(5):960-3. doi: 10.1210/endo-85-5-960.

Antifertility effect of 17 alpha-methyl-B-nortestosterone (SK&F 7690).

Saunders HL
 Tomaszewski J, Pauls J, Zuccarello W.

DOI: 10.1210/endo-85-5-960
PMID: 4241646 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Walking Activity of Flightless Harmonia axyridis (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) as a Biological Control Agent 1. J Econ Entomol. 2010 Oct;103(5):1564-8. doi: 10.1603/EC09420.

Walking activity of flightless Harmonia axyridis (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae) as 
a biological control agent.

Nakayama S(1)
 Seko T, Takatsuki J, Miura K, Miyatake T.

Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Evolutionary Ecology, Graduate School of Environmental Science, 
Okayama University, Okayama City, Okayama 700-8530, Japan.
The use of flightless strains of the multicolored Asian lady beetle, Harmonia 
axyridis (Pallas) (Coleoptera: Coccinellidae), established via artificial 
selection, can be highly effective as a biological control agent for aphids.
However, flightless H. axyridis must depend on walking for dispersion.
Therefore, data on the walking activity levels in flightless strains are 
important for the development of effective methods when releasing these agents 
in the field.
Results of measurement of walking activity levels using an 
infrared actograph showed that walking activity levels during the daytime (but 
not nighttime) in both sexes of pure flightless strains tended to be lower than 
those of control strains.
We also found that walking activity levels during the 
daytime for the F1 generation of hybrid strains, produced by reciprocal crossing 
between two pure flightless strains, were approximately equal to those of pure 
strains; the reduction in walking activity levels was not recovered by hybrid 
vigor.
Our results indicate that the reduction in walking activity levels in the 
pure flightless strains was not caused merely by inbreeding depression stemming 
from the artificial selection process.
Instead, potentially flight ability and 
walking activity levels in this species may be controlled by the pleiotropic 
effect of a gene.
DOI: 10.1603/EC09420
PMID: 21061954 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enaminones and norepinephrine employ convergent mechanisms to depress excitatory synaptic transmission in the rat nucleus accumbens <i>in vitro</i> <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>We recently reported that anticonvulsant anilino enaminones depress excitatory postsynaptic currents (EPSCs) in the nucleus accumbens (NAc) indirectly via γ‐aminobutyric acid (GABA) acting on GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub> receptors [<jats:ext-link xmlns:xlink="http://www.w3.org/1999/xlink" xlink:href="#b1">S.B. Kombian <jats:italic>et al</jats:italic>. (2005)</jats:ext-link><jats:italic>Br. J. Pharmacol</jats:italic>.
 145, 945–953].
Norepinephrine (NE) and dopamine (DA), both known to be involved in seizure disorders, also depress EPSCs in this nucleus.
The current study explored a possible interaction between enaminones and adrenergic and/or dopaminergic mechanisms that may contribute to their synaptic depression and anticonvulsant effect.
Using whole‐cell recording in rat forebrain slices containing the NAc, we show that NE‐induced, but not DA‐induced, EPSC depression occludes E139‐induced EPSC depressant effect.
UK14,304, a selective α<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> receptor agonist, mimicked the synaptic effect of NE and also occluded E139 effects.
Phentolamine, a non‐selective α‐adrenergic antagonist that blocked NE‐induced EPSC depression, also blocked the E139‐induced EPSC depression.
Furthermore, yohimbine, an α<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>‐adrenoceptor antagonist, also blocked the E139‐induced EPSC depression, while prazosin, a selective α<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>‐adrenergic antagonist, and propranolol, a non‐selective β‐adrenoceptor antagonist, did not block the E139 effect.
Similar to the E139‐induced EPSC depression, the NE‐induced EPSC depression was also blocked by the GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub> receptor antagonist, CGP55845.
By contrast, however, neither SCH23390 nor sulpiride, D1‐like and D2‐like DA receptor antagonists, respectively, blocked the E139‐induced synaptic depression.
These results suggest that NE and E139, but not DA, employ a similar mechanism to depress EPSCs in the NAc, and support the hypothesis that E139, like NE, may act on α<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>‐adrenoceptors to cause the release of GABA, which then mediates synaptic depression via GABA<jats:sub>B</jats:sub> receptors.</jats:p>
Time course of the carbon tetrachloride-induced decrease in mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase activity 1. Toxicol Appl Pharmacol. 1983 Feb;67(2):159-65. doi: 
10.1016/0041-008x(83)90220-x.

Time course of the carbon tetrachloride-induced decrease in mitochondrial 
aldehyde dehydrogenase activity.

Hjelle JJ
 Grubbs JH, Beer DG, Petersen DR.

Hepatic microsomal enzymes like cytochrome P-450 and glucose 6-phosphatase are 
inhibited after exposure to CCl4 in vivo.
Since comparatively less is known 
about the effects of CCl4 on nonmicrosomal enzymes, we investigated the rapidity 
by which CCl4 inhibits the low Km mitochondrial aldehyde dehydrogenase (ALDH) 
isozyme, an enzyme known to be inhibited 24 hr after CCl4 treatment.
The 
activity of this ALDH isozyme was significantly lowered 6 and 12 hr after a 
single 1 ml/kg intragastric dose of CCl4.
The mitochondrial low Km ALDH specific 
activities exhibited a similar pattern of destruction/inhibition to the 
documented target enzyme microsomal cytochrome P-450 in that lowest values were 
observed 6 hr after CCl4.
These values were 44 and 37% of control for cytochrome 
P-450 content and the low Km ALDH activity, respectively.
Alcohol dehydrogenase 
activity, expressed as activity per gram liver, was depressed 12 hr after CCl4 
dosing.
Finally, the activity of the low Km cytosolic ALDH, the isozyme that 
metabolizes malondialdehyde at low concentrations, was not affected by CCl4 
treatment.
The CCl4-induced decline in the activity of the matrix ALDH isozyme 
occurs earlier than previously reported mitochondrial damage.
The study of 
sensitive enzymes like the low Km ALDH may provide valuable information by which 
it may be possible to determine the relationship of the truly rapid biochemical 
effects of CCl4 such as microsomal lipid peroxidation with later effects on 
nonmicrosomal components.
DOI: 10.1016/0041-008x(83)90220-x
PMID: 6836571 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Design
 Synthesis, and Biological Evaluation of 1,2,3,7-Tetrahydro-6<i>H</i>-purin-6-one and 3,7-Dihydro-1<i>H</i>-purine-2,6-dione Derivatives as Corticotropin-Releasing Factor<sub>1</sub> Receptor Antagonists 1.
J Med Chem.
2004 Sep 9;47(19):4741-54. doi: 10.1021/jm049787k.
Design, synthesis, and biological evaluation of 
1,2,3,7-tetrahydro-6h-purin-6-one and 3,7-dihydro-1h-purine-2,6-dione 
derivatives as corticotropin-releasing factor(1) receptor antagonists.
Hartz RA(1), Nanda KK, Ingalls CL, Ahuja VT, Molski TF, Zhang G, Wong H, Peng Y, 
Kelley M, Lodge NJ, Zaczek R, Gilligan PJ, Trainor GL.
Author information:
(1)Discovery Chemistry, Neuroscience Biology, and Metabolism and 
Pharmacokinetics, Bristol-Myers Squibb Company, Pharmaceutical Research 
Institute, 5 Research Parkway, Wallingford, Connecticut 06492, USA.
richard.hartz@bms.com

A growing body of evidence suggests that CRF(1) receptor antagonism offers 
considerable therapeutic potential in the treatment of diseases resulting from 
elevated levels of CRF, such as anxiety and depression.
A series of novel 
1,2,3,7-tetrahydro-6H-purin-6-one and 3,7-dihydro-1H-purine-2,6-dione 
derivatives was synthesized and evaluated as corticotropin releasing factor-1 
(CRF(1)) receptor antagonists.
Compounds within this series, represented by 
compound 12d (IC(50) = 5.4 nM), were found to be highly potent CRF(1) receptor 
antagonists.
In addition, compounds 12d and 12j were determined to be selective 
CRF(1) antagonists.
The synthesis, structure-activity relationships and 
pharmacokinetic properties of compounds within this series is presented.
DOI: 10.1021/jm049787k
PMID: 15341489 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD)-induced spreading depression in the Substantia Nigra 1. Brain Res. 2013 Aug 21;1527:209-21. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.06.016. Epub 
2013 Jun 21.

Oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD)-induced spreading depression in the 
Substantia Nigra.

Karunasinghe RN(1)
 Lipski J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Centre for Brain Research, Faculty of Medical 
and Health Sciences, University of Auckland, Auckland 92019, New Zealand.
Spreading depression (SD) is a profound depolarization of neurons and glia that 
propagates in a wave-like manner across susceptible brain regions, and can 
develop during periods of compromised cellular energy such as ischemia, when it 
influences the severity of acute neuronal damage.
Although SD has been well 
characterized in the cerebral cortex and hippocampus, little is known of this 
event in the Substantia Nigra (SN), a brainstem nucleus engaged in motor control 
and reward-related behavior.
Transverse brain slices (250 μm; P21-23 rats) 
containing the SN were subject to oxygen and glucose deprivation (OGD) tests, 
modeling brain ischemia.
SD developed in lateral aspects of the SN within 
3.3±0.2 min of OGD onset, and spread through the Substantia Nigra pars 
reticulata (SNr), as indicated by fast-occurring and propagating increased 
tissue light transmittance and negative shift of extracellular DC potential.
These events were associated with profound mitochondrial membrane depolarization 
(ΔΨm) throughout the SN, as demonstrated by increased Rhodamine 123 
fluorescence.
Extracellular recordings from individual SNr neurons indicated 
rapid depolarization followed by depolarizing block, while dopaminergic neurons 
in the Substantia Nigra pars compacta (SNc) showed inhibition of firing 
associated with hyperpolarization.
SD evoked in the SNr was similar to 
OGD-induced SD in the CA1 region in hippocampal slices.
In the hippocampus, SD 
also developed during anoxia or aglycemia alone (associated with less profound 
ΔΨm than OGD), while these conditions rarely led to SD in the SNr.
Our results 
demonstrate that OGD consistently evokes SD in the SN, and that this phenomenon 
only involves the SNr.
It remains to be established whether nigral SD 
contributes to neuronal damage associated with a sudden-onset form of 
Parkinson's disease known as 'vascular parkinsonism'.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2013.06.016
PMID: 23796781 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
α‐Amanitin and 5‐fluorouridine inhibition of serumstimulated DNA synthesis in quiescent AKR‐2B mouse embryo cells <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>AKR‐2B mouse embryo cells undergoing the serum‐stimulated transition from a quiescent to a proliferating state exhibit an increase in the rate of hnRNA synthesis which appears to be mediated through an increase in the actual number of RNA polymerase II molecules. α‐Amanitin
 administered early in the prereplication interval following stimulation, effectively inhibits hnRNA synthesis, polysomal mRNA accumulation, polyribosome formation, and subsequent DNA synthesis, and cell division.
Unexpectedly, α‐amanitin treatment also produces almost complete inhibition of the synthesis of 45SrRNA precursor and the increase in accumulation of cytoplasmic rRNA following serum stimulation.
In order to determine whether the inhibition of new ribosomal synthesis might in itself be sufficient to prevent serum‐stimulated DNA synthesis, the effects of 5‐fluorouridine (5‐FU), a specific inhibitor of 45SrRNA processing, were investigated.
If added within eight hours following serum stimulation, 5‐FU was found to completely inhibit subsequent DNA synthesis.
These results suggest that quescent AKR‐2B cells do not contain a sufficient excess of ribosomes to support the synthesis of proteins which are required for DNA synthesis in response to serum growth factors.
Furthermore, an early polymerase II mediated synthesis of mRNA (s) coding for some factor(S) necessary for ribosomal gene transcription may be an essential step in the serum‐stimulated synthesis of new ribosomes.</jats:p>
Yearling Trait Comparisons among Inbred Lines and selected Noninbred and Randomly Bred Control Groups of Rambouillet
 Targhee and Columbia Ewes 1.
J Anim Sci.
1983 Feb;56(2):316-29. doi: 10.2527/jas1983.562316x.
Yearling trait comparisons among inbred lines and selected noninbred and 
randomly bred control groups of Rambouillet, Targhee and Columbia ewes.
Ercanbrack SK, Knight AD.
Inbreeding with concurrent selection was used to develop 26 Rambouillet, 20 
Targhee and 10 Columbia inbred lines of sheep.
Inbreeding coefficients averaged 
30, 29 and 30% for the three breeds, respectively, at the conclusion of the 
study.
A selected noninbred control group and a randomly bred unselected control 
group were maintained for each breed.
Yearling traits were evaluated for 545 
Rambouillet, 572 Targhee and 411 Columbia yearling ewes, each belonging to one 
of the inbred lines or control groups.
In each breed, the selected controls were 
generally of greatest overall merit, the unselected controls intermediate and 
the inbred lines of least merit.
Only a few yearling traits of only a few inbred 
lines were superior (P less than .05) to those of their appropriate selected 
control groups.
Selection within inbred lines was generally ineffective in 
offsetting inbreeding depression.
However, single trait selection for traits of 
high heritability, notably yearling weight, clean fleece weight and staple 
length, appeared to compensate for inbreeding effects on those traits.
Deleterious consequences of inbreeding were particularly apparent in yearling 
weight, average daily gain, type and condition scores, grease and clean fleece 
weights and index of overall merit.
Inbreeding also resulted in fewer neck folds 
among inbreds of all three breeds.
Correlations between the rankings of inbred 
lines at weaning and yearling ages were high for traits of higher heritability.
Superiority of the selected controls in most traits was of about the same 
magnitude at weaning and yearling ages.
In no case did the final overall merit 
(index value) of an inbred line of any of the three breeds significantly exceed 
the overall merit of its respective selected control group.
DOI: 10.2527/jas1983.562316x
PMID: 6841289 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Elimination of exercise-induced regional myocardial dysfunction by a bradycardiac agent in dogs with chronic coronary stenosis. <jats:p>We have previously demonstrated that the beneficial effect of cardioselective beta-blockade on exercise-induced ischemia is due entirely to negative chronotropism. Therefore we studied the effect of a new bradycardiac agent (UL-FS 49) in 10 dogs with chronic coronary artery stenosis produced by an ameroid constrictor. Regional myocardial function (sonomicrometers
 wall thickness) and blood flow (microspheres) were measured during a control treadmill exercise bout and an identical run 3 hr later after the administration of UL-FS 49 (1.0 mg/kg iv).
In the control run, heart rate increased from 114 +/- 20 to 230 +/- 19 beats/min and systolic wall thickening (%WT) in the poststenotic myocardium decreased from 23.3 +/- 5.2% at rest to 9.3 +/- 5.0%, a 60% reduction.
Subendocardial blood flow in the ischemic area decreased from 1.04 +/- 0.30 to 0.55 +/- 0.40 ml/min/g, blood flow per beat decreased from 9.1 X 10(-3) to 2.5 X 10(-3) ml/g, and mean transmural flow failed to increase (1.06 +/- 0.30 vs 1.08 +/- 0.39 ml/min/g).
During exercise with UL-FS 49, heart rate increased from 89 +/- 10 to only 139 +/- 10 beats/min.
End-diastolic left ventricular pressure was increased compared with that during the control run (35.7 +/- 3.0 vs 28.9 +/- 5.5 mm Hg) but left ventricular peak systolic pressure and dP/dt were unchanged.
%WT in the ischemic zone did not change significantly during exercise with UL-FS 49 (23.3 +/- 7.9% at rest, 21.5 +/- 8.4% during the run), and in the nonischemic zone it increased to the same extent as during the control run.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)</jats:p>
Effect of antidepressant drugs on 6-OHDA-treated mice in the FST 1. Eur Neuropsychopharmacol. 2007 Feb;17(3):187-93. doi: 
10.1016/j.euroneuro.2006.04.006. Epub 2006 Jun 6.

Effect of antidepressant drugs on 6-OHDA-treated mice in the FST.

Chenu F(1)
 Dailly E, Bourin M.

Author information:
(1)Neurobiologie de l'Anxiété et de la Dépression, EA 3256, Faculté de Médecine, 
1 rue Gaston Veil, 44035 Nantes Cedex, France.
There is growing evidence suggesting that dopamine could be indirectly involved 
in the appearance of behavioural effects of antidepressants.
In this study, we 
induced a partial (over 70%) and non-reversible depletion of dopamine-containing 
neurons in mice by i.c.v.
infusion of 6-OHDA.
Then, we compared the 
antidepressant-like effect of drugs (citalopram, paroxetine, desipramine and 
imipramine) with or without dopamine depletion in the mice forced swimming test.
Our results clearly show that lesion with 6-OHDA does not modify the response of 
mice to desipramine and imipramine, whereas dopamine depletion abolished the 
antidepressant-like effect of citalopram and paroxetine.
It could then be 
suggested that antidepressant-like effect of selective serotonin reuptake 
inhibitors (paroxetine and citalopram) in the mice FST requires the activation 
of dopaminergic pathways to occur.
DOI: 10.1016/j.euroneuro.2006.04.006
PMID: 16757155 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Gizzard ulceration in chicks fed cysteamine alone or in combination with a histamine H<sub>2</sub>‐receptor antagonist <jats:p>Zavy
 M.T., Lindsey, T.O.
&amp; Hedde, R.D.
Gizzard ulceration in chicks fed cysteamine alone or in combination with a histamine H2‐receptor antagonist.
<jats:italic>J.
vet.
Pharmacol.
Therap.</jats:italic> 11, 362–373.</jats:p><jats:p>A study was carried out to evaluate the effect of cysteamine‐HCl administration on gizzard ulceration and growth performance in broiler chicks.
The effectiveness of the histamine H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub>‐receptor antagonist, SKF 93479, in preventing gizzard ulcerations when given in combination with cysteamine‐HCl was also examined.
In the initial experiment cysteamine‐HCl at the level of 2400 mg/kg of the diet caused severe gizzard ulceration and mortality and decreased feed intake and growth in chicks.
The effect was not seen when cysteamine‐HCl was administered at 600 or 1200 mg/kg of the diet.
In Experiment 2 broiler chicks administered cysteamine‐HCl at 1800 mg/kg of the diet had an increased incidence of gizzard ulceration and decreased growth performance.
The severity of gizzard lesions and the depression of growth performance were not as great as in the group in Experiment 1 which received the 2400 mg/kg level of cysteamine‐HCl.
Addition of the H<jats:sub>2</jats:sub> antagonist SKF 93479 at 54 mg/kg of the diet had no effect on improving gizzard ulcer score or growth performance in chicks which received cysteamine‐HCl at the 1800 mg/kg of the diet level.
From these data it appears that the administration of ulcerogenic levels of cysteamine‐HCl in the chicken may involve a more complex pathogenesis in which factors other than acid hypersecretion are involved.</jats:p>
Upregulation of FLJ10540
 a PI3K-association protein, in rostral ventrolateral medulla impairs brain stem cardiovascular regulation during mevinphos intoxication 1.
Biochem Pharmacol.
2015 Jan 1;93(1):34-41. doi: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.10.018.
Epub  2014 Nov 7.
Upregulation of FLJ10540, a PI3K-association protein, in rostral ventrolateral 
medulla impairs brain stem cardiovascular regulation during mevinphos 
intoxication.
Tsai CY(1), Chen CH(1), Chang AY(2), Chan JY(1), Chan SH(3).
Author information:
(1)Center for Translational Research in Biomedical Sciences, Kaohsiung Chang 
Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung 83301, Taiwan, Republic of China.
(2)Institute of Physiology, National Cheng Kung University, Tainan, Taiwan, 
Republic of China.
(3)Center for Translational Research in Biomedical Sciences, Kaohsiung Chang 
Gung Memorial Hospital, Kaohsiung 83301, Taiwan, Republic of China.
Electronic 
address: shhchan@cgmh.org.tw.
FLJ10540, originally identified as a microtubule-associated protein, induces 
cell proliferation and migration during tumorigenesis via the formation of 
FLJ10540-PI3K complex and enhancement of PI3K kinase activity.
Interestingly, 
activation of PI3K/Akt cascade, leading to upregulation of nitric oxide synthase 
II (NOS II)/peroxynitrite signaling in the rostral ventrolateral medulla (RVLM), 
the brain stem site that maintains blood pressure and sympathetic vasomotor 
tone, mediates the impairment of brain stem cardiovascular regulation induced by 
the pesticide mevinphos.
We evaluated the hypothesis that upregulation of 
FLJ10540 in the RVLM is upstream to this repertoire of signaling cascade that 
underpins mevinphos-induced circulatory depression.
Microinjection bilaterally 
of mevinphos (10nmol) into the RVLM of anesthetized Sprague-Dawley rats induced 
a progressive hypotension that was accompanied by an increase (Phase I), 
followed by a decrease (Phase II) of an experimental index for 
baroreflex-mediated sympathetic vasomotor tone.
There was augmentation in 
FLJ10540 mRNA in the RVLM or FLJ10540 protein in RVLM neurons, both of which 
were causally and temporally related to an augmentation of binding between the 
catalytic subunit (p110) and regulatory subunit (p85) of PI3K, phosphorylation 
of Akt at Thr308 site, and NOS II, superoxide or peroxynitrite level in the 
RVLM.
Immunoneutralization of FJL10540 in the RVLM significantly antagonized 
those biochemical changes, and blunted the progressive hypotension and the 
reduced baroreflex-mediated sympathetic vasomotor tone during mevinphos 
intoxication.
We conclude that upregulation of FLJ10540 in the RVLM elicits 
impairment of brain stem cardiovascular regulation that underpins circulatory 
depression during mevinphos intoxication via activation of PI3K/Akt/NOS 
II/peroxynitrite signaling cascade in the RVLM.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bcp.2014.10.018
PMID: 25449601 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of choline incorporation into brain lipids in rats by urethane
 a proposed mechanism of depression of the central nervous system 1.
Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol.
1977 Jul;298(3):205-10. doi: 
10.1007/BF00500888.
Inhibition of choline incorporation into brain lipids in rats by urethane, a 
proposed mechanism of depression of the central nervous system.
Kewitz H, Pleul O.
Concentrations and specific radioactivities of choline, acetylcholine, 
phosphorylcholine, lipid choline, and sn-glycero-3-phosphorylcholine after i.v.
injection of methyl-14C-choline were measured in the brain of untreated controls 
and of rats anesthesized with urethane.
The specific activity was found to be 
decreased during deep anesthesia by 40% in acetylcholine, 20-30% in 
phosphorylcholine, 50-75% in lipid choline, and 30-40% in 
sn-glycero-3-phosphoryl-choline.
No significant change was detected in the 
specific activity of choline.
The brain concentration of acetylcholine was 
increased by 40%, the concentration of sn-glycero-3-phosphorylcholine, however, 
was diminished by 10% during anesthesia.
No change was found in the 
concentration of the other choline containing compounds investigated.
Measuring 
choline incorporation into 4 subcellular fractions of brain tissue specific 
activities were found to be decreased by the same percentage, although 2 
fractions (nuclei and microsomes) were higher labelled than the 2 other 
fractions (crude mitochondria with synaptosomes and lysosomes).
A correlation 
between the biochemical and the functional alterations is supported by the 
dose-effect relationships on both parameters.
It is suggested that urethane 
reduces turnover of lipids and by that mechanism inhibits the exocytotic release 
of the transmitter from presynaptic nerve endings.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00500888
PMID: 895894 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of South African traditional medicine in animal models for depression 1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2008 Oct 28;119(3):542-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2008.08.030.
Epub  2008 Sep 10.

Effects of South African traditional medicine in animal models for depression.

Pedersen ME(1)
 Szewczyk B, Stachowicz K, Wieronska J, Andersen J, Stafford GI, 
van Staden J, Pilc A, Jäger AK.
Author information:
(1)Department of Medicinal Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmaceutical Sciences, 
University of Copenhagen, 2 Universitetsparken, 2100 Copenhagen O, Denmark.
ETHNOPHARMACOLOGICAL RELEVANCE: The four South African medicinal plants 
Agapanthus campanulatus (AC), Boophone distica (BD), Mondia whitei (MW) and 
Xysmalobium undulatum (XU) are used in traditional medicine to treat depression.
AIM: To evaluate the effect of ethanolic extracts of the plants in models for 
depression.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: The extracts were screened for affinity for the serotonin 
transporter (SERT) in the [(3)H]-citalopram-binding assay.
The inhibitory 
potency of the extracts towards the SERT, the noradrenalin transporter (NAT) and 
the dopamine transporter (DAT) were determined in a functional uptake inhibition 
assay.
Antidepressant-like effects of the extracts were investigated using the 
tail suspension test (TST) and the forced swim test in both rats (rFST) and mice 
(mFST).
RESULTS: All four plants showed affinity for SERT in the binding assay.
AC and 
BD showed functional inhibition of SERT, NAT and DAT, MW affected SERT while XU 
showed no effect.
BD showed significant effect in the TST and in the mFST/rFST, 
AC showed significant effect in mFST, MW showed significant effect in the rFST 
and XU showed significant effect in the mFST.
CONCLUSION: In this study we have demonstrated the antidepressant activity of 
four South African medicinal plants in vitro and in vivo, supporting their 
rational use in traditional medicine.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2008.08.030
PMID: 18809486 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Maternal factors and monoamine changes in stress-resilient and susceptible mice: Cross-fostering effects 1. Brain Res. 2006 Sep 21;1111(1):122-33. doi: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.06.089.
Epub  2006 Jul 31.

Maternal factors and monoamine changes in stress-resilient and susceptible mice: 
cross-fostering effects.

Prakash P(1)
 Merali Z, Kolajova M, Tannenbaum BM, Anisman H.

Author information:
(1)Institute of Neuroscience, Carleton University, Life Science Research Bldg, 
Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Genetic factors influence stressor-provoked monoamine changes associated with 
anxiety and depression, but such effects might be moderated by early life 
experiences.
To assess the contribution of maternal influences in determining 
adult brain monoamine responses to a stressor, strains of mice that were either 
stressor-reactive or -resilient (BALB/cByJ and C57BL/6ByJ, respectively) were 
assessed as a function of whether they were raising their biological offspring 
or those of the other strain.
As adults, offspring were assessed with respect to 
stressor-provoked plasma corticosterone elevations and monoamine variations 
within discrete stressor-sensitive brain regions.
BALB/cByJ mice demonstrated 
poorer maternal behaviors than C57BL/6ByJ dams, irrespective of the pups being 
raised.
In response to a noise stressor, BALB/cByJ mice exhibited higher plasma 
corticosterone levels and elevated monoamine turnover in several limbic and 
hypothalamic sites.
The stressor-provoked corticosterone increase in BALB/cByJ 
mice was diminished among males (but not females) raised by a C57BL/6ByJ dam.
Moreover, increased prefrontal cortical dopamine utilization was attenuated 
among BALB/cByJ mice raised by a C57BL/6ByJ dam.
These effects were asymmetrical 
as a C57BL/6ByJ mice raised by a BALB/cByJ dam did not exhibit increased 
stressor reactivity.
It appears that stressors influence multiple neurochemical 
systems that have been implicated in anxiety and affective disorders.
Although 
monoamine variations were largely determined by genetic factors, maternal 
influences contributed to stressor-elicited neurochemical changes in some 
regions, particularly dopamine activation within the prefrontal cortex.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainres.2006.06.089
PMID: 16876768 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of sex
 thyro-parathyroidectomy, and light regime on levels and circadian rhythms of wheel-running in rats 1.
Physiol Behav.
1989 Sep;46(3):341-6. doi: 10.1016/0031-9384(89)90001-2.
Effects of sex, thyro-parathyroidectomy, and light regime on levels and 
circadian rhythms of wheel-running in rats.
Schull J(1), Walker J, Fitzgerald K, Hiilivirta L, Ruckdeschel J, Schumacher D, 
Stanger D, McEachron DL.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, Haverford College, PA 19041.
Intact and thyro-parathyroidectomized (TPX) Sprague-Dawley rats of both sexes 
were observed for 24 days under a 12:12 light:dark cycle (Entrainment), followed 
by 20 days in constant dim red light (Free-Run).
Circadian periods and levels of 
wheel-running activity were examined.
Intact females and TPX males were 
significantly more active and had significantly shorter free-running circadian 
periods than intact males, and the effects of TPX in females were different from 
those in males.
Circadian periods in TPX females were slightly, but not 
significantly, shorter than in intact females, and activity levels in TPX 
females were nonsignificantly depressed relative to intact females.
It was also 
found that day versus night activity levels differed more in TPX animals than in 
intact animals, especially during entrainment, suggesting that TPXs may be more 
sensitive to some effects of light.
A number of possible explanations for the 
effects of TPX are considered, including changes in thyroid and calcitonin 
levels, interactions with gonadal hormones, and possible developmental effects 
of thyroid hormones on the circadian system.
It is also possible that rhythm 
changes are secondary to alterations in activity levels.
Human manic depressives 
reportedly have an unusually high incidence of thyroid, parathyroid, and calcium 
regulation abnormalities, display shortened circadian sleep-wake rhythms and 
abnormal levels of activity, and may also be hypersensitive to some effects of 
light; in addition, depression predominates in women, whereas mania predominates 
in men.
The present results suggest that thyroid dysfunction could be partially 
responsible for the some of these abnormalities, and for sex differences in the 
manifestations of these disorders.
DOI: 10.1016/0031-9384(89)90001-2
PMID: 2623053 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Identification of a treatment-resistant
 ketamine-sensitive genetic line in the chick anxiety-depression model 1.
Pharmacol Biochem Behav.
2013 Nov 15;113:63-7. doi: 10.1016/j.pbb.2013.10.013.
Epub 2013 Oct 22.
Identification of a treatment-resistant, ketamine-sensitive genetic line in the 
chick anxiety-depression model.
Sufka KJ(1), White SW.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychology, University of Mississippi, Oxford, MS 38677, USA; 
Department of Pharmacology, University of Mississippi, Oxford, MS 38677, USA; 
Research Institute of Pharmaceutical Sciences, University of Mississippi, 
Oxford, MS 38677, USA.
Electronic address: pysufka@olemiss.edu.
The introduction of pharmacotherapies for treatment-resistant depression is 
hindered by translational challenges with existing preclinical screening models 
that fail to adequately model the clinical features of this syndrome.
This 
research sought to screen antidepressants in two selected genetic lines 
previously identified as stress-vulnerable and -resilient in the chick 
anxiety-depression model.
Separate groups of socially-raised 5-6 day-old Black 
Australorps (stress-vulnerable) and Production Reds (stress-resilient) were 
administered imipramine (0-20 mg/kg), fluoxetine (0-10 mg/kg), maprotiline (0-10 
mg/kg) or ketamine 0-15 mg/kg) IP (1 ml/kg) and placed into isolation for 90 
min.
Distress vocalizations (DVoc) were recorded.
Onset of behavioral despair 
and Dvoc rates during the depression-like phase (30-90 min) were calculated.
Black Australorps entered behavioral despair approximately 25% faster than 
Productions Reds highlighting stress-vulnerability in this Black Australorp 
line.
In the depression-like phase, Black Australorps were insensitive to 
imipramine and fluoxetine but sensitive to ketamine, a finding that parallels 
stress-vulnerable, treatment resistant depressive disorder.
The chick 
anxiety-depression model using the Black Australorp line may prove useful in 
pre-clinical screening of novel antidepressant targets for use in 
treatment-resistant depression.
© 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.pbb.2013.10.013
PMID: 24157688 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Reversible Myocardial Depression Associated with Sepsis in a Dog 1. J Vet Intern Med. 2007 Sep-Oct;21(5):1117-20. doi: 
10.1892/0891-6640(2007)21[1117:rmdaws]2.0.co;2.

Reversible myocardial depression associated with sepsis in a dog.

Dickinson AE(1)
 Rozanski EA, Rush JE.
Author information:
(1)Foster Hospital for Small Animals, Cummings School of Veterinary Medicine, 
Tufts University, North Grafton, MA 01536, USA.
DOI: 10.1892/0891-6640(2007)21[1117:rmdaws]2.0.co;2
PMID: 17939574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Decreased cerebral blood flow during acute hyperglycemia 1. Brain Res. 1995 Dec 12;703(1-2):145-50. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(95)01077-7.

Decreased cerebral blood flow during acute hyperglycemia.

Duckrow RB(1).

Author information:
(1)Department of Neurology
 University of Connecticut Health Center, Farmington 
06030-1845, USA.
Cerebral blood flow (CBF) decreases during acute hyperglycemia but the mechanism 
of this change is unknown.
The role that plasma osmolality plays in this effect 
was reexamined in pentobarbital-anesthetized rats using a continuous measure of 
CBF, laser-Doppler flowmetry.
CBF decreased 25% during acute elevation of plasma 
osmolality induced by intraperitoneal injection of concentrated solutions of 
glucose or mannitol.
In addition there were brief transient increases of CBF 
with peak magnitude 2-4-times the baseline level that were not accompanied by 
transient depression of electroencephalographic activity.
These transient CBF 
increases may explain why discontinuous methods of CBF measurement fail to 
detect flow decreases after mannitol injection.
Decreased CBF measured during 
acute hyperglycemia may be the result of increased plasma osmolality.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(95)01077-7
PMID: 8719626 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Changes in the age structure of the hematopoietic stem cells of older mice under the influence of a factor inhibiting their proliferative activity]. 1. Ontogenez. 1994 May-Jun;25(3):26-32.

[Changes in the age structure of the hematopoietic stem cells of older mice 
under the influence of a factor inhibiting their proliferative activity].

[Article in Russian]

Orlovskaia IA
 Dubinina LV, Khaldoianidi SK, Kozlov VA.
The effect of stem cell proliferation inhibitor (PIF) on hemopoietic stem cell 
and committed precursor cell subpopulations in aged mice was studied.
The 
following parameters were analyzed: the number of CFUs-5, CFUs-8, and CFUs-12 in 
bone marrow and spleen, the number of BFUe, CFUs-GM, CFUs-M, and the ability of 
bone marrow cells of aged mice to repopulate bone marrow of lethally irradiated 
recipients (MRA).
Characteristic of aged mice were an increased number of 
precursors (mainly in bone marrow), changes in their erythropoietic 
differentiation, and a decreased MRA of bone marrow cells.
The suppression of 
stem cell proliferation by PIF was accompanied by a decrease in the total number 
of precursors and led to changes in their migration and differentiation, which 
might provide for restoration of hemopoiesis in aged mice to the level 
characteristic of young mice.
PMID: 8047326 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Subdiaphragmatic vagotomy blocks induction of IL-1 beta mRNA in mice brain in response to peripheral LPS <jats:p> To test the possibility that the vagus nerve is involved in the communication between the immune system and the brain
 we injected sham-operated and vagotomized mice with physiological saline or lipopolysaccharide (LPS; 400 micrograms/kg ip).
Vagotomy attenuated LPS-induced depression of general activity measured 2 h after treatment but did not alter the increase in plasma levels of IL-1 beta in response to LPS.
In addition, vagotomy abrogated the LPS-induced increase in the levels of transcripts for IL-1 beta, as determined by semiquantitative polymerase chain reaction after reverse transcription, in the hypothalamus and hippocampus, but not in the pituitary of vagotomized mice.
This relationship between the effects of vagotomy on the behavioral effects of LPS and the LPS-induced brain expression of IL-1 beta mRNA indicates that vagal afferent fibers play a prominent role in the pathways of communication between the immune system and the brain.
</jats:p>
Delayed Implantation Induced by Anti-Estrogenic Compounds in Rats 1. Endocrinol Jpn. 1970 Aug;17(4):313-21. doi: 10.1507/endocrj1954.17.313.

Delayed implantation induced by antiestrogenic compounds in rats.

Kobayashi F
 Kakushi H, Miyake T.

DOI: 10.1507/endocrj1954.17.313
PMID: 5537139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Regulation of excitability and plasticity by endocannabinoids and PKA in developing hippocampus <jats:p>
            The activity-dependent strengthening and weakening of synaptic transmission are hypothesized to be the basis of not only memory and learning but also the refinement of neural circuits during development. Here we report that
 in the developing CA1 area of the hippocampus, endocannabinoid (eCB)-mediated heterosynaptic long-term depression (LTD) of glutamatergic excitatory synaptic transmission is associated with PKA-mediated homosynaptic long-term potentiation (LTP).
This form of LTD was dominant at postnatal days 2–10 (P2–P10), attenuated during development, and finally disappeared in the mature hippocampus.
Heterosynaptic LTD of excitatory postsynaptic currents in the developing hippocampus was expressed presynaptically, spread to neighboring neurons, and was mediated by eCBs.
Heterosynaptic LTD of field excitatory postsynaptic potentials was associated with a decrease in fiber volley amplitude with a similar time course.
Depression of fiber volleys was blocked by K
            <jats:sup>+</jats:sup>
            channel blockers, suggesting the involvement of the decrease in presynaptic excitability in heterosynaptic LTD.
In the P2–P5 hippocampus, eCBs also attenuate LTP and fiber volleys in homosynaptic pathways and help to prevent too much excitability in the neonatal hippocampus where the GABAergic system is poorly developed and even excitatory.
In the hippocampus older than P6 (P &gt; 6), however, LTP is protected from eCB-mediated depression by PKA activated at presynaptic sites by high-frequency stimulation, serving to highlight PKA-mediated LTP by weakening inactive synapses even in adjacent cells.
Thus, eCBs and PKA make synapses plastic without changing excitability homeostasis in the developing hippocampus.
</jats:p>
Impact of a unilateral brain lesion on cortisol secretion and emotional state: anterior/posterior dissociation in humans 1. Psychoneuroendocrinology. 2003 Jul;28(5):674-86. doi: 
10.1016/s0306-4530(02)00050-1.

Impact of a unilateral brain lesion on cortisol secretion and emotional state: 
anterior/posterior dissociation in humans.

Tchiteya BM(1)
 Lecours AR, Elie R, Lupien SJ.
Author information:
(1)Istitut universitaire de gériatrie de Montréal, Centre de recherche, 
Montréal, Québec, Canada.
bmtchiteyaxcz@hotmail.com

The main goal of this study was to evaluate whether a unilateral brain lesion in 
a human population is associated with a modification of the circadian cortisol 
secretion profile, and/or patient's emotional state.
The second goal of this 
study was to assess whether there would be differences in both the pattern of 
cortisol secretion and emotional state in brain-damaged patients as a function 
of side of lesion, and localization (anterior vs posterior) of lesion.
Eight 
patients with a left cortical lesion, six patients with a right cortical lesion, 
four patients with basal ganglia lesions (2 left and 2 right) and ten healthy 
volunteers were evaluated daily on measures of salivary cortisol levels and 
subjective feelings of joy and sadness at 0700, 1200, 1600 and 1900 hours over a 
15-day period.
Patients with cortical brain lesions presented higher cortisol 
levels and higher scores of sadness at the time of the morning peak (7:00 am), 
when compared to healthy volunteers and patients with basal ganglia lesions.
Laterality of the lesion was not related to cortisol secretion, but frontal 
damage (anterior lesion) was associated with higher cortisol levels at the time 
of the morning peak (7:00 am) when compared to more posterior damage.
There was 
no significant correlation between basal circulating levels of cortisol and 
emotional states in patients and healthy subjects.
The results of this study 
suggest that hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal (HPA) axis dysregulation is 
associated with unilateral injury particularly in frontal areas.
These results, 
obtained in a human population, go along with recent animal studies reporting an 
implication of frontal regions in HPA activity.
DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4530(02)00050-1
PMID: 12727134 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Cardioprotective Effects of an Active Metabolite of Furnidipine in 2 Models of Isolated Heart and on In Vivo Ischemia–induced and Reperfusion-induced Arrhythmias in Rats 1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2011 Feb;57(2):183-93. doi: 
10.1097/FJC.0b013e318202e2ea.

Cardioprotective effects of an active metabolite of furnidipine in 2 models of 
isolated heart and on in vivo ischemia–induced and reperfusion-induced 
arrhythmias in rats.

Krzemiński TF(1)
 Mitrega K, Varghese B, Hudziak D, Porc M, Kedzia A, Sielańczyk 
AW, Jabłecka A, Jasiński M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Cardiovascular Research Division, Medical 
University of Silesia, ul.
Jordana 19, 41-808 Zabrze, Poland.
tadkrzem@ka.onet.pl

Dihydropyridines are known not only to have antiarrhythmic effects but also to 
exert a significant cardiac depressive influence.
We previously showed that M-2, 
an active and final metabolite of furnidipine, had cardioprotective effects 
without the marked cardiac depression seen with this dihydropyridine.
We studied 
the influence of M-2 infusion (10(-7) M) on hemodynamics during low-flow and 
regional ischemia in the rat working heart.
We examined the protection conferred 
by M-2 infusion (10(-7) M) against effects of veratridine-induced intracellular 
calcium overload in the Langendorff heart.
Additionally, we performed an in vivo 
study to explore the effects of oral administration of M-2 at different times 
and doses, in the ischemia- and reperfusion-induced arrhythmias model.
M-2 
improved coronary flow during low-flow and regional ischemia while favorably 
maintaining aortic pressure parameters.
M-2 provided outstanding protection 
against deleterious effects of calcium overloading by significantly preventing 
rise in left ventricular diastolic pressure and decrease in coronary flow.
M-2 
reduced mortality and incidence and duration of severe arrhythmias while 
exhibiting differential influence on blood pressure, which depended on dose and 
time of administration and could suggest its clinical indication.
The results of 
our entire study establish a beneficial cardioprotective role of M-2, which 
exhibited pleiotropic effects on the ischemic heart by imparting protection in 
various ways.
This combined with good tolerance, long duration of action, low 
toxicity, and relatively large therapeutic window makes M-2 a promising 
candidate as a precursor for a new chemical class of cardioprotective drugs.
DOI: 10.1097/FJC.0b013e318202e2ea
PMID: 21052014 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Neuroleptics decrease calcium-activated potassium conductance in hippocampal pyramidal cells 1. Brain Res. 1987 Mar 24;407(1):159-62. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(87)91231-5.

Neuroleptics decrease calcium-activated potassium conductance in hippocampal 
pyramidal cells.

Dinan TG
 Crunelli V, Kelly JS.
Intracellular recordings were made from pyramidal CA1-neurones of the 
hippocampal slice preparation.
Bath application of a wide variety of 
neuroleptics was found to depress the slow afterhyperpolarization, which is 
mediated in these neurons by a calcium-dependent potassium conductance occurring 
following a burst of spikes.
The depression of this conductance took place in 
the presence of calcium spikes of normal amplitude and duration, and except in 
the case of trifluoperazine, without alteration in resting membrane potential or 
input resistance.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(87)91231-5
PMID: 2884012 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[An original psychotropic drug: sulpiride]. 1. Sem Hop. 1969 Apr 20;45(19):1301-14.

[An original psychotropic drug: sulpiride].

[Article in French]

Borenstein P
 Champion C, Cujo P, Gekière F, Olivenstein C, Kramarz P.

PMID: 4307000 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The accumulation of citrate cycle intermediates in rat liver cells oxidizing palmitate 1. Biochim Biophys Acta. 1971 Jun 8;239(1):26-32. doi: 
10.1016/0005-2760(71)90188-3.

The accumulation of citrate cycle intermediates in rat liver cells oxidizing 
palmitate.

Sauer F
 Mahadevan S, Erfle JD.
DOI: 10.1016/0005-2760(71)90188-3
PMID: 5569938 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Stromal cell-derived factor-1alpha directly modulates voltage-dependent currents of the action potential in mammalian neuronal cells. 1. J Neurochem. 2005 May;93(4):963-73. doi: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03083.x.

Stromal cell-derived factor-1alpha directly modulates voltage-dependent currents 
of the action potential in mammalian neuronal cells.

Guyon A(1)
 Rovère C, Cervantes A, Allaeys I, Nahon JL.
Author information:
(1)Institut de Pharmacologie Moléculaire et Cellulaire (IPMC)- UMR 6097 CNRS, 
Valbonne, France.
Stromal cell-derived factor-1alpha (SDF-1alpha) is a chemokine whose receptor, 
CXCR4, is distributed in specific brain areas including hypothalamus.
SDF-1alpha 
has recently been found to play important roles in neurons, although direct 
modulation of voltage-gated ionic channels has never been shown.
In order to 
clarify this issue, we performed patch-clamp experiments in fetal mouse 
hypothalamic neurons in culture.
SDF-1alpha (10 nm) decreased the peak and 
rising slope of the action potentials and spike discharge frequency in 22% of 
hypothalamic neurons tested.
This effect was blocked by the CXCR4 antagonist AMD 
3100 (1 microm) but not by the metabotropic glutamate receptor antagonist MCPG 
(500 microm), indicating a direct action of SDF-1alpha on its cognate receptor.
This effect involved a depression of both inward and outward voltage-dependent 
currents of the action potential.
We confirmed these effects in the human 
neuroblastoma cell line SH-SY5Y, which endogenously expresses CXCR4.
Voltage-clamp experiments revealed that SDF-1alpha induced a 20% decrease in the 
peak of the tetrodotoxin-sensitive sodium current and 
tetraethylammonium-sensitive delayed rectifier potassium current, respectively.
Both effects were concentration dependent, and blocked by AMD 3100 (200 nm).
This dual effect was reduced or blocked by 0.4 mm GTPgammaS G-protein 
pre-activation or by pre-treatment with the G-protein inhibitor pertussis toxin 
(200 ng/mL), suggesting that it is mediated via activation of a G(i/o) protein.
This study extends the functions of SDF-1alpha to a direct modulation of 
voltage-dependent membrane currents of neuronal cells.
DOI: 10.1111/j.1471-4159.2005.03083.x
PMID: 15857399 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Olfactory Deficits Cause Anxiety-Like Behaviors in Mice <jats:p>Anxiety disorders are characterized by persistent fear in the absence of immediate threat and represent the most common psychiatric diseases
 with an estimated 28% lifetime prevalence worldwide (Kessler et al., 2010).
While symptoms of anxiety are typically evoked by sensory stimuli, it is unknown whether sensory deficits contribute to the development of anxiety disorders.
Here we examine the effect of defined genetic mutations that compromise the function of the olfactory system on the development of anxiety-like behaviors in mice.
We show that the functional inactivation of the main olfactory epithelium, but not the vomeronasal organ, causes elevated levels of anxiety.
Anxiety-like behaviors are also observed in mice with a monoclonal nose, that are able to detect and discriminate odors but in which the patterns of odor-evoked neural activity are perturbed.
In these mice, plasma corticosterone levels are elevated, suggesting that olfactory deficits can lead to chronic stress.
These results demonstrate a central role for olfactory sensory cues in modulating anxiety in mice.</jats:p>
Cortical spreading depression and gene regulation: Relevance to migraine <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Cortical spreading depression (CSD) may be the underlying mechanism of migraine aura. The role of CSD in initiating a migraine headache remains to be determined
 but it might involve specific changes in gene expression in the brain.
To examine these changes, four episodes of CSD at 5‐minute intervals were induced in the mouse brain by application of 300mM KCl, and gene expression was examined 2 hours later using cDNA array and reverse transcriptase–polymerase chain reaction.
Controls consisted of groups that received anesthesia only, attachment of recording electrodes only, and application of 0.9% NaCl.
Of the over 1,180 genes examined in our experiments, those consistently regulated by CSD included vasoactive peptides; the vasodilator atrial natriuretic peptide was induced by CSD, while the vasoconstrictor neuropeptide Y was downregulated.
Other genes specifically regulated by CSD were involved in oxidative stress responses (major prion protein, glutathione‐S‐transferase‐5, and apolipoprotein E).
L‐type calcium channel mRNA was upregulated.
In summary, CSD regulates genes that are intrinsic to its propagation, that identify accompanying vascular responses as a potential source of pain, and that protect against its potential pathological consequences.
We believe these observations have strong relevance to the mechanisms of migraine and its outcomes.</jats:p>
Biochemical correlates of motor changes caused by the manipulation of dopamine function in the substantia nigra of the mouse 1. Neuropharmacology. 1985 Dec;24(12):1155-61. doi: 10.1016/0028-3908(85)90148-0.

Biochemical correlates of motor changes caused by the manipulation of dopamine 
function in the substantia nigra of the mouse.

Bradbury AJ
 Costall B, Kelly ME, Naylor RJ, Smith JA.
2-Di-n-propylamino-5,6-dihydroxytetralin, injected bilaterally into the 
substantia nigra of the mouse, caused dose-dependent motor inhibition which was 
associated with decreased levels of DOPAC and increased levels of dopamine in 
the striatum.
(-)Sulpiride, injected into the substantia nigra, antagonised the 
locomotor depression although the partial antagonism of the elevation in the 
level of dopamine in the striatum and of the reduction in levels of DOPAC did 
not achieve significance.
The specificity of the action of tetralin on dopamine 
receptors was shown by the failure of prazosin and yohimbine to antagonise the 
locomotor depression induced by tetralin and the reduction in levels of DOPAC.
The selectivity of the action of tetralin for the dopamine system was shown by 
its failure to affect levels of noradrenaline, serotonin and 
5-hydroxyindoleacetic acid in the striatum.
The injection of tetralin into the 
substantia nigra also caused biochemical changes in limbic areas (nucleus 
accumbens and tuberculum olfactorium), where the levels of dopamine and DOPAC 
were elevated, and in the frontal cortex where the levels of DOPAC were reduced.
These changes were antagonised by a concomitant injection of (-)sulpiride into 
the substantia nigra.
It is concluded that the action of dopamine agonists in 
the midbrain can decrease the functional activity in the ascending dopaminergic 
pathways.
DOI: 10.1016/0028-3908(85)90148-0
PMID: 4094652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
CA1 pyramid-pyramid connections in rat hippocampus in vitro: Dual intracellular recordings with biocytin filling 1. Neuroscience. 1996 Oct;74(4):1009-18. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(96)00251-5.

CA1 pyramid-pyramid connections in rat hippocampus in vitro: dual intracellular 
recordings with biocytin filling.

Deuchars J(1)
 Thomson AM.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology, Royal Free Hospital School of Medicine, London, 
U.K.
In adult rat hippocampus, simultaneous intracellular recordings from 989 pairs 
of CA1 pyramidal cells revealed nine monosynaptic, excitatory connections.
Six 
of these pairs were sufficiently stable for electrophysiological analysis.
Mean 
excitatory postsynaptic potential amplitude recorded at a postsynaptic membrane 
potential between -67 and -70 mV was 0.7 +/- 0.5 mV (0.17-1.5 mV), mean 10-90% 
rise time was 2.7 +/- 0.9 ms (1.5-3.8 ms) and mean width at half-amplitude was 
16.8 +/- 4.1 ms (11.6-25 ms).
Cells were labelled with biocytin and identified 
histologically.
For one pair that was fully reconstructed morphologically, 
excitatory postsynaptic potential average amplitude was 1.5 mV, 10-90% rise time 
2.8 ms and width at half-amplitude 11.6 ms (at -67 mV).
In this pair, correlated 
light and electron microscopy revealed that the presynaptic axon formed two 
synaptic contacts with third-order basal dendrites of the postsynaptic pyramid, 
one with a dendritic spine, the other with a dendritic shaft.
In the four pairs 
tested, postsynaptic depolarization increased excitatory postsynaptic potential 
amplitude and duration.
In two, D-2-amino-5-phosphonovalerate (50 microM) 
reduced the amplitude and duration of the excitatory postsynaptic potential.
The 
remainder of the excitatory postsynaptic potential now increased with 
postsynaptic hyperpolarization and was abolished by 20 microM 
6-cyano-7-nitroquinoxaline-2,3-dione (n = 1).
Paired-pulse depression was 
evident in the four excitatory postsynaptic potentials tested.
This depression 
decreased with increasing inter-spike interval.
These results provide the first 
combined electrophysiological and morphological illustration of synaptic 
contacts between pyramidal neurons in the hippocampus and confirm that 
connections between CA1 pyramidal neurons are mediated by both 
N-methyl-D-aspartate and 
alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionate/kainate receptors.
DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(96)00251-5
PMID: 8895869 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enhancement of Fibrinolysis and Blood Clotting: Role of Microvascular Changes 1. Med Exp Int J Exp Med. 1968;18(4):299-307. doi: 10.1159/000137165.

Enhancement of fibrinolysis and blood clotting: role of microvascular changes.

Holemans R
 Mlynarczyk EJ, Silver MJ.
DOI: 10.1159/000137165
PMID: 4981645 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Synthesis of current knowledge of an inhibitor of libido in the male
 the methylestrenolone].
1.
Encephale.
1968 Jul-Aug;57(4):333-52.
[Synthesis of current knowledge of an inhibitor of libido in the male, the 
methylestrenolone].
[Article in French]

Servais J, Hubin P.

PMID: 4237574 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressant Effect of Cnestis ferruginea Vahl ex DC (Connaraceae): Involvement of Cholinergic
 Monoaminergic and L-arginine-nitric Oxide Pathways 1.
Drug Res (Stuttg).
2016 May;66(5):235-45. doi: 10.1055/s-0035-1565174.
Epub
2016  Jan 20.
Antidepressant Effect of Cnestis ferruginea Vahl ex DC (Connaraceae): 
Involvement of Cholinergic, Monoaminergic and L-arginine-nitric Oxide Pathways.
Owope TE(1), Ishola IO(1), Akinleye MO(2), Oyebade R(1), Adeyemi OO(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology, Therapeutics and Toxicology, Faculty of Basic 
Medical Science, College of Medicine, University of Lagos, Lagos, Nigeria.
(2)Department of Pharmaceutical Chemistry, Faculty of Pharmacy, University of 
Lagos, Idi-Araba, Lagos, Nigeria.
BACKGROUND: We have previously reported antidepressant effect of Cnestis 
ferruginea (CF) in behavioral models of depression.
Due to the promise shown by 
this extract, this study was carried out to investigate the contribution of 
monoaminergic, cholinergic and nitrergic systems to the antidepressant-like 
effect elicited by CF.
METHODS: Male albino mice were pretreated with monoaminergic or cholinergic 
receptor antagonists, L-arginine or N(G)-nitro-L-arginine (nitric oxide synthase 
inhibitor) (at doses reported to block the in vivo effect of the agonists), 
15 min before oral administration of CF (100 mg/kg), 1 h later, the forced swim 
test (FST) in mice was carried out.
RESULTS: CF treatment produced significant changes in the duration of swimming 
(F(5,42)=9.86, P<0.001), climbing behaviour (F(5,42)=4.51, P=0.004) and mean 
time spent immobile (F(5,42)=11.55, P<0.001) vs. vehicle-treated control.
Co-administration of CF with fluoxetine or imipramine potentiated their effect.
However, pretreatment of mice with reserpine (F(1,16)=119.20, P<0.001), prazosin 
(F(1,16)=68.98, P<0.001), sulpiride (F(1,16)=15.46, P<0.01), RS 127445 
((F(1,20)=8.22, P<0.01), SB 399885 ((F(1,20)=38.44, P<0.001), atropine 
(F(1,16)=53.77, P<0.001), or L-arginine (nitric oxide precursor) (F(1,16)=10.35, 
P<0.01) prevented CF-induced antidepressant-like effect in mice.
In addition, 
pretreatment of mice with L-NNA (10 mg/kg) augmented the effect of CF.
CONCLUSION: C. ferruginea exerts its antidepressant-like action through 
interaction with α-adrenoceptor, dopamine D2, 5-HT2B, 5-HT6 and muscarinic 
cholinergi1c receptors as well as L-arginine-nitric oxide systems.
C. ferruginea 
could be used as adjuvant with conventional antidepressants in the treatment of 
major depressive disorder.
© Georg Thieme Verlag KG Stuttgart · New York.
DOI: 10.1055/s-0035-1565174
PMID: 26789652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The influence of some physico-chemical factors on the biliary excretion of a series of structurally related aryl sulphate esters 1. Biochem Pharmacol. 1969 Jan;18(1):181-95. doi: 10.1016/0006-2952(69)90023-9.

The influence of some physico-chemical factors on the biliary excretion of a 
series of structurally related aryl sulphate esters.

Hearse DJ
 Powell GM, Olavesen AH, Dodgson KS.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-2952(69)90023-9
PMID: 4889090 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Acute treatment with methotrexate induces hippocampal dysfunction in a mouse model of breast cancer 1. Brain Res Bull. 2012 Oct 1;89(1-2):50-6. doi: 
10.1016/j.brainresbull.2012.07.003. Epub 2012 Jul 13.

Acute treatment with methotrexate induces hippocampal dysfunction in a mouse 
model of breast cancer.

Yang M(1)
 Kim JS, Kim J, Jang S, Kim SH, Kim JC, Shin T, Wang H, Moon C.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Anatomy, College of Veterinary Medicine, Chonnam 
National University, Gwangju, South Korea.
Methotrexate (MTX) is a well-known cytostatic agent used in adjuvant 
chemotherapy for breast cancer, that has neurological side effects, including 
depression and cognitive impairment.
We investigated the neurotoxic effects of 
MTX on the hippocampus and hippocampus-dependent behaviors in breast cancer cell 
line (FM3A)-inoculated tumor-bearing mice.
In addition, we evaluated the changes 
in inducible nitric oxide synthase (iNOS) and cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) 
expression in the hippocampus of tumor-bearing mice after treatment with MTX.
Depressive-like behavior test (tail-suspension test, TST) and learning and 
memory tasks (passive avoidance) were administered 24h after MTX (40 mg/kg, 
i.p.)
injection.
MTX-treated tumor-bearing mice showed significant 
depressive-like behaviors and cognitive impairment.
Treatment with MTX 
significantly decreased the number of doublecortin (a marker for immature 
progenitor neurons)-positive cells in the hippocampal dentate gyrus of 
tumor-free and tumor-bearing mice.
Moreover, treatment with MTX significantly 
upregulated proinflammatory enzymes, including iNOS and COX-2, in tumor-bearing 
mice.
These findings indicate that the acute neurotoxic effect of MTX leads to 
hippocampal dysfunction including depressive-like behaviors and memory deficits, 
which may be related to an inhibition of neurogenesis and an increase of the 
inflammatory response in the hippocampus of a mouse model of breast cancer.
Copyright © 2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.brainresbull.2012.07.003
PMID: 22796103 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Monokine depression of bile flow in the isolated perfused rat liver 1. J Surg Res. 1989 Sep;47(3):248-50. doi: 10.1016/0022-4804(89)90115-7.

Monokine depression of bile flow in the isolated perfused rat liver.

Ott MT(1)
 Vore M, Barker DE, Strodel WE, McClain CJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, University of Kentucky Medical Center, Lexington 
40536-0084.
Multiple system organ failure (MSOF) is a progressive dysfunction of vital 
organs that may develop in clinical settings such as sepsis or multiple trauma.
One component of this syndrome is cholestasis and impaired liver function.
The 
mechanism(s) for this liver failure (and the failure of other organs) remains 
obscure.
Macrophages and Kupffer cells have been shown to secrete cytokines such 
as interleukin-1 and tumor necrosis factor.
These cytokines mediate many aspects 
of the acute phase response, and they also can produce cellular injury.
The 
purpose of this study was to evaluate the effects of a semipurified murine 
monokine preparation having interleukin-1 activity on bile flow in the rat 
isolated perfused liver (IPL).
The monokine preparation produced a significant 
reduction of bile flow in the IPL system.
The effect could not be explained by a 
venoocclusive phenomenon or residual endotoxin in the monokine preparation.
We 
conclude that a semipurified monokine preparation having interleukin-1 but not 
tumor necrosis activity produced a significant depression of bile flow in the 
IPL, and we suggest that macrophage secretory product(s) may be responsible for 
the cholestasis in MSOF.
DOI: 10.1016/0022-4804(89)90115-7
PMID: 2770282 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of Long-Term Cyclophosphamide Treatment on T and B Lymphocytes in Normal Guinea Pigs <jats:p>The effect of long-term repeated cyclophosphamide administration at low doses on T and B lymphocyte levels in the blood
 lymph nodes and thymus of the guinea pig has been studied.
A significant depletion of B cell levels occurred in the blood and the lymph nodes.
Although there was evidence of depression of T cell levels in both blood and thymus, these changes were not statistically significant, except in the case of total T lymphocyte levels in the blood in one experiment.
It is suggested that differences in sensitivity of T and B cells to cyclophosphamide may be related to differences in proliferative turnover and in their capacitv to repair damage to DNA.</jats:p>
[An experimental study of the effect of etomidate on central sympathetic activity
 respiration and circulation (author's transl)].
1.
Prakt Anaesth.
1978 Dec;13(6):495-501.
[An experimental study of the effect of etomidate on central sympathetic 
activity, respiration and circulation (author's transl)].
[Article in German]

Pfeifer G, Tauberger G, Schulte am Esch J.
The effect of Etomidate on central sympathetic activity, respiration and 
circulation were studied in animals at rest and under asphyctic conditions.
The 
doses used were 0.15, 0.3 and 0.6 milligrams/kilogram bodyweight.
Injection of 
the drug into animals at rest caused excitation lasting for about 10 seconds and 
then lowering of sympathetic activity by about 15-30 per cent.
With doses of 0.6 
mg the depression lasted for about 15 minutes.
Central stimulation by asphyxia 
often a more pronounced dose-dependent depression of sympathetic activity by 
about 15-40% of the original level was observed.
Activity of the phrenic nerve 
was affected only with doses of 0.6 mg; the reduction by about 30% lasted for up 
to 15 min.
Injection of 0.6 mg was followed within one minute by a short-lasting 
fall in blood pressure by about 10%.
The heart rate remained unchanged at rest 
but during asphyctic conditions the heart rate was less slowed down than would 
normally occur with vagal stimulation.
Etomidate apparently also depressed the 
vagal centres.
Similarities and differences in action between Etomidate and 
propanidid are discussed.
PMID: 740630 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of a synthetic progestin on ventilatory response to hypoxia in anesthetized rats <jats:p> Effects on ventilatory responses to progressive isocapnic hypoxia of a synthetic potent progestin
 chlormadinone acetate (CMA), were determined in the halothane-anesthetized male rat.
Ventilation during the breathing of hyperoxic gas was largely unaffected by treatment with CMA when carotid chemoreceptor afferents were kept intact.
The sensitivity to hypoxia evaluated by hyperbolic regression analysis of the response curve did not differ between the control and CMA groups.
The reduction of ventilation after bilateral section of the carotid sinus nerve (CSN) in hyperoxia was less severe in CMA-treated than in untreated animals.
Furthermore, the CMA-treated rats showed a larger increase in ventilation during the hypoxia test and a lower PO2 break point for ventilatory depression.
Inhibition of hypoxic ventilatory depression by CMA persisted even after the denervation of CSN.
We conclude that exogenous progestin likely protects regulatory mechanism(s) for respiration against hypoxic depression through a stimulating action independent of carotid chemoreceptor afferents and without a change in the sensitivity of the ventilatory response to hypoxia.
</jats:p>
Tumor Necrosis Factor-α and Basic Fibroblast Growth Factor Differentially Inhibit the Insulin-like Growth Factor-I Induced Expression of Myogenin in C2C12 Myoblasts 1. Exp Cell Res. 1999 May 25;249(1):177-87. doi: 10.1006/excr.1999.4465.

Tumor necrosis factor-alpha and basic fibroblast growth factor differentially 
inhibit the insulin-like growth factor-I induced expression of myogenin in C2C12 
myoblasts.

Layne MD(1)
 Farmer SR.
Author information:
(1)Department of Biochemistry, Boston University School of Medicine, Boston, 
Massachusetts 02118, USA.
Tumor necrosis factor-alpha (TNF-alpha) plays a role in several disease states 
such as sepsis, cachexia, and non-insulin-dependent diabetes.
TNF-alpha 
interferes with insulin signaling and inhibits differentiation-specific gene 
expression in adipose tissue and skeletal muscle.
We have examined the 
mechanisms by which TNF-alpha, in comparison to basic fibroblast growth factor 
(bFGF), inhibits the insulin-like growth factor-I (IGF-I)-induced 
differentiation of C2C12 myoblasts.
Adhesion of quiescent, suspended myoblasts 
to collagen in high concentrations of IGF-I (10 nM) induced these cells to 
proliferate during the initial 24 h postplating and in so doing transiently 
inhibited the expression of myogenin, an essential transcription factor 
controlling myoblast differentiation.
Low doses of IGF-I (1 nM) were minimally 
mitogenic and enhanced muscle-specific gene expression.
Quiescent myoblasts 
treated with bFGF in combination with IGF-I did not express myogenin, but 
expressed proliferating cell nuclear antigen and underwent DNA synthesis.
In 
contrast, TNF-alpha in the presence or absence of 1 nM IGF-I, did not stimulate 
DNA synthesis in myoblasts.
However, TNF-alpha inhibited myogenin mRNA and 
protein expression.
Expression of the cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21 
correlated with myogenin expression and myoblast differentiation, but not with 
growth arrest.
These results indicate that both TNF-alpha and bFGF inhibit 
myogenin expression but differentially influence myoblast proliferation.
Copyright 1999 Academic Press.
DOI: 10.1006/excr.1999.4465
PMID: 10328964 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Enhanced inhibition of both cellular protein synthesis and malate dehydrogenase by aged aquoplatinum(II) complexes 1. Chem Biol Interact. 1979 Feb;24(2):209-15. doi: 10.1016/0009-2797(79)90009-7.

Enhanced inhibition of both cellular protein synthesis and malate dehydrogenase 
by aged aquoplatinum(II) complexes.

Kohl HH
 Friedman ME, Melius P, Mora EC, McAuliffe CA.
Previous studies have shown cis-diamminedichloroplatinum(II) (Cis) an effective 
anti-tumour agent in man and animals.
Evidence is presented here that formation 
of aquo complexes of this platinum derivative will significantly enhance its 
inhibitory properties with respect to two separate biochemical functions, namely 
inhibition of protein synthesis in hamster medulloblastoma cells and in 
inhibiting the activity of L-malate dehydrogenase (MDH) in a cell free system.
Inhibition of cell protein synthesis rises from 8% using freshly dissolved drug 
to 30% when aged solutions of drug are employed at an inhibitor concentration of 
0.1 mM.
The inhibitory enhancement seen using purified malic dehydrogenase 
increases from 16% (fresh) to 57% (aged) at an inhibitor concentration of 1 mM.
DOI: 10.1016/0009-2797(79)90009-7
PMID: 428011 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Actions of microiontophoretically applied ibotenate on cat spinal interneurones <jats:p> Microiontophoretic applications of ibotenate
 an amino acid analogue of glutamate, evoked biphasic responses from single dorsal horn interneurones of the cat spinal cord, i.e., an initial increase in the firing rate followed by a sustained depression of spontaneous firing.
A reduced cell sensitivity to excitatory amino acids or peripheral field stimulation was also found during the ibotenate-induced depression.
These effects were not produced by glutamate, quisqualate, or kainate, although occasional transient reductions of spontaneous cell firing were observed after application of glutamate.
It is suggested that ibotenate might act on inhibitory as well as excitatory receptors of cat spinal interneurones.
</jats:p>
Effect of amphotericin B on natural killer cell activity <i>in vitro</i> 1. J Antimicrob Chemother. 1983 Mar;11(3):257-62. doi: 10.1093/jac/11.3.257.

Effect of amphotericin B on natural killer cell activity in vitro.

Hauser WE Jr
 Remington JS.
Incubation of murine peritoneal and spleen natural killer cells with 
amphotericin B at concentrations of 2.5, 5 and 10 mg/l in vitro, resulted in 
depression of their tumoricidal activity which had been augmented in vivo by 
infection with Toxoplasma gondii.
In contrast, amphotericin B at the same 
concentrations had little or no effect on spontaneous natural killer cell 
activity in vitro.
These in-vitro data suggest amphotericin B may have adverse 
effects on natural killer cell function in vivo.
DOI: 10.1093/jac/11.3.257
PMID: 6841308 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Permanent Relief from Intermittent Cold Stress-Induced Fibromyalgia-Like Abnormal Pain by Repeated Intrathecal Administration of Antidepressants <jats:sec><jats:title>Background:</jats:title><jats:p> Fibromyalgia (FM) is characterized by chronic widespread pain
 which is often refractory to conventional painkillers.
Numerous clinical studies have demonstrated that antidepressants are effective in treating FM pain.
We previously established a mouse model of FM-like pain, induced by intermittent cold stress (ICS).
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results:</jats:title><jats:p> In this study, we find that ICS exposure causes a transient increase in plasma corticosterone concentration, but not in anxiety or depression-like behaviors.
A single intrathecal injection of an antidepressant, such as milnacipran, amitriptyline, mianserin or paroxetine, had an acute analgesic effect on ICS-induced thermal hyperalgesia at post-stress day 1 in a dose-dependent manner.
In addition, repeated daily antidepressant treatments during post-stress days 1-5 gradually reversed the reduction in thermal pain threshold, and this recovery was maintained for at least 7 days after the final treatment.
In addition, relief from mechanical allodynia, induced by ICS exposure, was also observed at day 9 after the cessation of antidepressant treatment.
In contrast, the intravenous administration of these antidepressants at conventional doses failed to provide relief.
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions:</jats:title><jats:p> These results suggest that the repetitive intrathecal administration of antidepressants permanently cures ICS-induced FM pain in mice.
</jats:p></jats:sec>
Definition of a metal-dependent/Li(+)-inhibited phosphomonoesterase protein family based upon a conserved three-dimensional core structure. <jats:p>Inositol polyphosphate 1-phosphatase
 inositol monophosphate phosphatase, and fructose 1,6-bisphosphatase share a sequence motif, Asp-Pro-(Ile or Leu)-Asp-(Gly or Ser)-(Thr or Ser), that has been shown by crystallographic and mutagenesis studies to bind metal ions and participate in catalysis.
We compared the six alpha-carbon coordinates of this motif from the crystal structures of these three phosphatases and found that they are superimposable with rms deviations ranging from 0.27 to 0.60 A.
Remarkably, when these proteins were aligned by this motif a common core structure emerged, defined by five alpha-helices and 11 beta-strands comprising 155 residues having rms deviations ranging from 1.48 to 2.66 A.
We used the superimposed structures to align the sequences within the common core, and a distant relationship was observed suggesting a common ancestor.
The common core was used to align the sequences of several other proteins that share significant similarity to inositol monophosphate phosphatase, including proteins encoded by fungal qa-X and qutG, bacterial suhB and cysQ (identical to amtA), and yeast met22 (identical to hal2).
Evolutionary comparison of the core sequences indicate that five distinct branches exist within this family.
These proteins share metal-dependent/Li(+)-sensitive phosphomonoesterase activity, and each predicted tree branch exhibits unique substrate specificity.
Thus, these proteins define an ancient structurally conserved family involved in diverse metabolic pathways including inositol signaling, gluconeogenesis, sulfate assimilation, and possibly quinone metabolism.
Furthermore, we suggest that this protein family identifies candidate enzymes to account for both the therapeutic and toxic actions of Li+ as it is used in patients treated for manic depressive disease.</jats:p>
Pyrostegia venusta attenuate the sickness behavior induced by lipopolysaccharide in mice 1. J Ethnopharmacol. 2010 Oct 28;132(1):355-8. doi: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.07.053.
Epub  2010 Aug 18.

Pyrostegia venusta attenuate the sickness behavior induced by lipopolysaccharide 
in mice.

Veloso CC(1)
 Bitencourt AD, Cabral LD, Franqui LS, Dias DF, dos Santos MH, 
Soncini R, Giusti-Paiva A.
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Physiology, Institute of Biomedical Sciences, Federal 
University of Alfenas, MG, 37130-000 Alfenas, MG, Brazil.
AIM OF THE STUDY: Pyrostegia venusta (Ker.)
Miers (Bignoniaceae) is native to 
the Brazilian Cerrado and popularly known as "cipó-de-são-joão."
In traditional 
Brazilian medicine, the Pyrostegia venusta are used as a general tonic as well 
as a treatment for diarrhea, vitiligo, cough, and common diseases of the 
respiratory system related to infections, such as bronchitis, flu and cold.
This 
study was conducted to evaluate the effects of a hydroethanolic extract of 
flowers of Pyrostegia venusta on sickness behaviors induced by 
lipopolysaccharide in mice.
MATERIALS AND METHODS: To evaluate the effects of orally administered Pyrostegia 
venusta hydroethanolic extract (PvHE) on lipopolysaccharide-induced sickness 
behaviors, mice were submitted to the forced swim test (FST) and the open field 
test.
RESULTS: Lipopolysaccharide (LPS, 100 μg/kg, i.p.)
administration increased the 
time spent floating in the FST and depressed locomotor activity in the open 
field.
Pretreatment with PvHE at test doses of 100 and 300 mg/kg, p.o.
attenuated the behavioral changes induced by LPS in the FST and open field test.
This effect was similar to pretreatment with dexamethasone (1 mg/kg), which is a 
steroidal drug that inhibits immune and inflammatory responses, including 
cytokine production.
CONCLUSION: The extract of Pyrostegia venusta attenuated the depressive-like and 
exploratory behaviors induced by lipopolysaccharide.
Thus, our results supported 
previous claims of the usefulness of these plants in traditional therapies and 
suggest that these plants may be useful in the treatment of disorders that 
induced sickness behavior, such as flu and cold.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier Ireland Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.jep.2010.07.053
PMID: 20727400 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
FURTHER STUDIES ON THE SYMPATHOMIMETIC ACTION OF TETANUS TOXIN 1. Jpn J Pharmacol. 1971 Jun;21(3):317-23. doi: 10.1254/jjp.21.317.

Further studies on the sympathomimetic action of tetanus toxin.

Sanyal RK
 Dave M.

DOI: 10.1254/jjp.21.317
PMID: 4397667 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Diphenyl diselenide supplemented diet reduces depressive-like behavior in hypothyroid female rats 1. Physiol Behav. 2014 Jan 30;124:116-22. doi: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2013.10.036.
Epub  2013 Nov 13.

Diphenyl diselenide supplemented diet reduces depressive-like behavior in 
hypothyroid female rats.

Dias GR(1)
 de Almeida TM, Sudati JH, Dobrachinski F, Pavin S, Soares FA, 
Nogueira CW, Barbosa NB.
Author information:
(1)Departamento de Bioquímica e Biologia Molecular, CCNE, Programa de 
Pós-Graduação em Bioquímica Toxicológica, Universidade Federal de Santa Maria, 
RS, Brazil.
Hypothyroidism has been associated to psychiatric disorder development and 
tissue oxidative damage.
In this study, we evaluated the effect of diphenyl 
diselenide supplementation on depressive-like behavior triggered by methimazole 
exposure in female rats.
Additionally, thiobarbituric acid reactive substances 
(TBARS), reactive oxygen species (ROS) and non-protein thiol (NP-SH) levels were 
analyzed in cerebral cortex, hippocampus and striatum structures of rats.
Monoamine oxidase (MAO) activity was evaluated in total brain.
Firstly, female 
rats received methimazole (MTZ) 20mg/100ml in the drinking water for 30days and 
were evaluated in open-field and forced swimming tests (FST).
In this set of 
experiments, the rats exposed to MTZ presented a depressive-like behavior, which 
was evidenced by a significant increase in the immobility time when compared to 
control group.
Thereafter, MTZ-induced hypothyroid rats received either a 
standard or a diet containing 5ppm of diphenyl diselenide, and then they were 
evaluated monthly in open-field and FST tests during 3months.
No alteration on 
the locomotor performance was observed among the groups.
The depressive-like 
behavior of hypothyroid rats was blunted by diphenyl diselenide supplementation 
during all experimental periods.
The levels of thyroid hormones remained low in 
MTZ exposed groups until the end of experimental period.
The MTZ group had an 
increase in TBARS and ROS levels that were restored by diphenyl diselenide 
supplementation.
NP-SH content of cerebral structures was not modified by MTZ 
exposure and/or diphenyl diselenide supplementation.
Diphenyl diselenide 
supplementation restored the MAO B activity that was decreased in MTZ group.
In 
summary, our results show that hypothyroidism induced by MTZ methimazole 
triggers a depressive-like behavior in female rats and that dietary diphenyl 
diselenide was able to reduce this effect.
Copyright © 2013 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.physbeh.2013.10.036
PMID: 24239994 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Potential of imatinib mesylate as a novel treatment for pulmonary fibrosis 1. Expert Rev Respir Med. 2008 Aug;2(4):419-31. doi: 10.1586/17476348.2.4.419.

Potential of imatinib mesylate as a novel treatment for pulmonary fibrosis.

Chhina M(1)
 Shlobin OA, Grant G, Nathan SD.
Author information:
(1)Center for Biomedical Genomics, George Mason University, 10900 University 
Boulevard 109, Manassas, VA 20110, USA.
mchhina@gmu.edu

Pulmonary fibrosis is a disease characterized by progressive scarring of the 
lungs, with idiopathic pulmonary fibrosis (IPF) being the most aggressive form.
The diagnosis of IPF is made after other conditions are excluded and is based on 
a characteristic clinical presentation, radiographic features and, sometimes, 
pathologic specimen.
Existing IPF drug regimens, including corticosteroids and 
cytotoxic medications, are generally ineffective.
To date, only lung 
transplantation has been shown to improve mortality in carefully selected 
patients.
Multiple therapeutic agents have been investigated but none have 
proven to be successful.
Novel drugs are constantly being sought in an attempt 
to find a therapy that halts or reverses this disease.
Imatinib mesylate is used 
for chronic myelogenous leukemia and gastrointestinal stromal tumors.
It also 
has antifibrotic properties, as demonstrated in several studies using mouse 
models of pulmonary fibrosis.
Currently, trials are underway to investigate its 
efficacy in human subjects with IPF.
DOI: 10.1586/17476348.2.4.419
PMID: 20477206
Anesthetic Techniques for Fetal Surgery <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Background:</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Use of high-dose inhalational anesthesia during open fetal surgery may induce maternal–fetal hemodynamic instability and fetal myocardial depression. The authors’ preliminary human retrospective study demonstrated less fetal bradycardia and left ventricular systolic dysfunction with lower dose desflurane supplemented with propofol and remifentanil IV anesthesia (SIVA). In this animal study
 the authors compare maternal–fetal effects of high-dose desflurane anesthesia (HD-DES) and SIVA.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Methods:</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Of 26 instrumented midgestational ewes, data from 11 animals exposed to both SIVA and HD-DES in random sequences and six animals exposed to HD-DES while maternal normotension was maintained were analyzed.
Maternal electroencephalography was used to guide comparable depths of anesthesia in both techniques.
Hemodynamic parameters, blood gas, and fetal cardiac function from echocardiography were recorded.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Results:</jats:title>
            <jats:p>Compared with SIVA, HD-DES resulted in significant maternal hypotension (mean arterial pressure difference, 19.53 mmHg; 95% CI, 17.6–21.4; <jats:italic toggle="yes">P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.0001), fetal acidosis (pH 7.11 <jats:italic toggle="yes">vs</jats:italic>.
7.24 at 150 min, <jats:italic toggle="yes">P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.001), and decreased uterine blood flow.
In the HD-DES group with maternal normotension, uterine blood flow still declined and fetal acidosis persisted, with no statistically significant difference from the group exposed to HD-DES that had maternal hypotension.
There was no statistically significant difference in fetal cardiac function.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
          <jats:sec>
            <jats:title>Conclusion:</jats:title>
            <jats:p>In sheep, SIVA affects maternal hemodynamics less and provides better fetal acid/base status than high-dose desflurane.
Fetal echocardiography did not reflect myocardial dysfunction in this model.</jats:p>
          </jats:sec>
Effect of estrogen on the vocal sac pigmentation
 throat colouration and the nature of croaking in the toad (Bufo melanostictus) during breeding season.
1.
Endokrinologie.
1968;53(1):46-7.
Effect of estrogen on the vocal sac pigmentation, throat colouration and the 
nature of croaking in the toad (Bufo melanostictus) during breeding season.
Bhaduri S, Bardhan NR, Chatterjee A.

PMID: 5721744 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
INBREEDING ALTERS RESISTANCE TO INSECT HERBIVORY AND HOST PLANT QUALITY IN MIMULUS GUTTATUS (SCROPHULARIACEAE) 1. Evolution. 2002 Jan;56(1):22-30. doi: 10.1111/j.0014-3820.2002.tb00846.x.

Inbreeding alters resistance to insect herbivory and host plant quality in 
Mimulus guttatus (Scrophulariaceae).

Carr DE(1)
 Eubanks MD.
Author information:
(1)The Blandy Experimental Farm, University of Virginia, Boyce 22620, USA.
dec5z@virginia.edu

Previous studies have demonstrated genetic variation for resistance to insect 
herbivores and host plant quality.
The effect of plant mating system, an 
important determinant of the distribution of genetic variation, on host plant 
characteristics has received almost no attention.
This study used a controlled 
greenhouse experiment to examine the effect of self- and cross-pollination in 
Mimulus guttatus (Scrophulariaceae) on resistance to and host plant quality for 
the xylem-feeding spittlebug Philaenus spumarius (Homoptera: Cercopidae).
Spittlebugs were found to have a negative effect on two important fitness 
components in M. guttatus, flower production and above ground biomass.
One of 
two M. guttatus populations examined showed a significant interaction between 
the pollination and herbivore treatments.
In this case, the detrimental effects 
of herbivores on biomass and flower production were much more pronounced in 
inbred (self) plants.
The presence of spittlebug nymphs increased inbreeding 
depression by as much as three times.
Pollination treatments also had 
significant effects on important components of herbivore fitness, but these 
effects were in opposite directions in our two host plant populations.
Spittlebug nymphs maturing on self plants emerged as significantly larger adults 
in one of our host plant populations, indicating that inbreeding increased host 
plant quality.
In our second host plant population, spittlebug nymphs took 
significantly longer to develop to adulthood on self plants, indicating that 
inbreeding decreased host plant quality.
Taken together these results suggest 
that the degree of inbreeding in host plant populations can have important and 
perhaps complex effects on the dynamics of plant-herbivore interactions and on 
mating-system evolution in the host.
DOI: 10.1111/j.0014-3820.2002.tb00846.x
PMID: 11913665 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
SOD prevents damage and attenuates eicosanoid release in a rabbit model of necrotizing enterocolitis <jats:p> Necrotizing enterocolitis (NEC) was produced in anesthetized rabbits by transmural injection of intestinal loops with an acidified solution of casein and calcium gluconate
 mimicking the luminal milieu of afflicted neonates.
Intravenous infusion of superoxide dismutase (SOD) 15 min after NEC induction prevented intestinal damage.
In ex vivo perfused intestinal loops, we determined the sites of eicosanoid release and their contribution to the vascular effects of N-formyl-methionyl-leucyl-phenylalanine (fMLP) and platelet-activating factor (PAF) in damaged and SOD-salvaged intestine.
The vascular effluent was the primary site of stimulated eicosanoid release.
The vascular responses to fMLP (vasoconstriction) and PAF (vasodilation) were not altered by SOD, although vascular resistance was higher in the SOD group.
SOD treatment attenuated 1) transmural fluid shifts in ex vivo perfused intestinal preparations, an index of vascular permeability, 2) fMLP-induced prostaglandin E2, 6-ketoprostaglandin F1 alpha (6-keto-PGF1 alpha), and leukotriene B4 (LTB4) release, and 3) PAF-induced release of 6-keto-PGF1 alpha and LTB4.
Stimulated thromboxane B2 release was not altered by SOD.
Thus NEC can be established by a luminal insult that causes local generation of free radicals and exaggerated release of prostaglandins and leukotrienes.
</jats:p>
Modulation of the Antidepressant-Like Effects of Sustained Administration of Carisbamate and Lamotrigine on Monoaminergic Systems: Electrophysiological Studies in the Rat Brain 1. J Pharmacol Exp Ther. 2013 Nov;347(2):487-96. doi: 10.1124/jpet.113.203315.
Epub  2013 Aug 28.

Modulation of the antidepressant-like effects of sustained administration of 
carisbamate and lamotrigine on monoaminergic systems: electrophysiological 
studies in the rat brain.

Shim S(1)
 El Mansari M, Blier P.

Author information:
(1)University of Ottawa Institute of Mental Health Research (S.S., M.E.M., P.B.)
and Department of Cellular and Molecular Medicine, University of Ottawa (S.S., 
P.B.
), Ottawa, Ontario, Canada.
Carisbamate and lamotrigine are anticonvulsants that act on neuronal 
voltage-gated sodium channels.
Carisbamate has shown antidepressant-like effects 
in animal models of depression, and lamotrigine is a mood stabilizer with a 
therapeutic effect in depressive episodes of patients with bipolar disorder.
This study examined the effects of carisbamate and lamotrigine on monoaminergic 
transmission in rodents, which could contribute to their antidepressant action.
In vivo electrophysiological recordings were carried out in rats after 2 and 14 
days administration of vehicle, carisbamate (60 mg/kg daily), or lamotrigine (25 
mg/kg daily).
Overall firing activity of the dorsal raphe nucleus (DRN) 
serotonin (5-HT), locus coeruleus norepinephrine, and ventral tegmental area 
dopamine (DA) neurons was decreased with carisbamate.
Lamotrigine also decreased 
5-HT neuronal firing, and this effect was abolished by lesion of the prefrontal 
cortex.
Despite these decreases in firing activity after their prolonged 
administration, both anticonvulsants exhibited a significant increase in tonic 
activation of hippocampus 5-HT1A receptors, as shown by a disinhibition of the 
firing activity of pyramidal neurons in response to the selective antagonist 
WAY-100635 (N-{2-[4(2-methoxyphenyl)-1-piperazinyl] ethyl}-N-(2-pyridinyl) 
cyclohexanecarboxamide trihydrochloride).
This finding reveals an increase in 
the 5-HT level that may be attributed to a desensitization of the terminal 
5-HT1B autoreceptors.
This study demonstrates that sustained carisbamate and 
lamotrigine administration decreases 5-HT firing in the DRN but nevertheless 
enhances 5-HT transmission in the forebrain.
This serotonergic effect may be 
associated with an antiglutamatergic action and may contribute to the 
antidepressant-like effect of carisbamate in the forced swim test and the 
antidepressant properties of lamotrigine.
DOI: 10.1124/jpet.113.203315
PMID: 23986541 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Antidepressants selectively antagonize the hyperactivity induced in rats by long-term isolation 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1979 Nov 16;59(3-4):293-6. doi: 10.1016/0014-2999(79)90293-0.

Antidepressants selectively antagonize the hyperactivity induced in rats by 
long-term isolation.

Garzón J
 Fuentes JA, Del Rio J.
Rats isolated at 16--18 days of age showed after 10--12 months a complex 
behavioural syndrome in which locomotor activity was markedly increased when 
compared to that of group-housed controls.
The hyperactivity of the socially 
deprived animals was selectively blocked by clinically effective antidepressants 
but not by other classes of psychotropic drugs.
The present animal model may be 
of value for the detection of new antidepressants and contribute to elucidate 
the aetiology of depression.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-2999(79)90293-0
PMID: 527650 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chemically induced hepatic cytosol from the Sprague—Dawley rat: evidence for specific binding of 2
3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin to components kinetically distinct from the Ah receptor 1.
Toxicol Lett.
1990 May;51(3):295-302. doi: 10.1016/0378-4274(90)90072-t.
Chemically induced hepatic cytosol from the Sprague-Dawley rat: evidence for 
specific binding of 2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin to components 
kinetically distinct from the Ah receptor.
Landers JP(1), Birse LM, Nakai JS, Winhall MJ, Bunce NJ.
Author information:
(1)Guelph-Waterloo Centre for Graduate Work in Chemistry, Department of 
Chemistry and Biochemistry, University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada.
A series of exogenous chemicals was used as potential inducers for the hepatic 
Ah receptor in the Sprague-Dawley rat.
2,3,7,8-Tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin, 
2,2',4,4',5,5'-hexachlorobiphenyl and phenobarbital all induced an elevated 
level of 3H-2,3,7,8-tetrachlorodibenzo-p-dioxin specific binding, while 
3,3',4,4'-tetrachloroazobenzene and trans-3,3',4,4'-tetrachlorostilbene caused a 
depression.
Mixtures of these chemicals caused additive effects.
Elevated levels 
of specific binding appeared to be heterologous, comprising a binding species 
having the normal high stability of the Ah receptor in its liganded form, and 
another less stable substance having a half-life of approximately 2 h at 37 
degrees C.

DOI: 10.1016/0378-4274(90)90072-t
PMID: 2160139 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Interbacterial transfer of episomal (RTF) resistance to antibiotics in mice]. 1. Antibiotiki. 1969 Aug;14(8):749-53.

[Interbacterial transfer of episomal (RTF) resistance to antibiotics in mice].

[Article in Russian]

Tereshin IM
 Belousova II, El'gart RE.
PMID: 4907796 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of cytochalasin D on the structure of mixed synapses and their electrotonic conductivity]. 1. Tsitologiia. 1999;41(7):590-7.

[Effect of cytochalasin D on the structure of mixed synapses and their 
electrotonic conductivity].

[Article in Russian]

Pavlik LL(1)
 Turas NR, Pakhotina ID, Moshkov DA.
Author information:
(1)Institute of Theoretical and Experimental Biophysics, Russian Academy of 
Sciences, Pushchino.
By methods of qualitative and quantitative electronmicroscopy the ultrastructure 
of mixed synapses of the goldfish Mauthner cell (MC) and their ability to 
strengthen electrotonic transmission after application of cytochalasin D, a 
highly specific inhibitor of actin polymerization.
On the background of 
cytochalasin action tetranization of afferent rootlets of acoustic nerve, 
terminated with mixed synapses on the MC lateral dendrite, failed to induce any 
long-term potentiation of electronic coupling.
On the contrary, a long-term 
depression of electrotonic transmission was evoked in this case.
On the 
ultrastructureal level such a depression of synaptic conductivity was seen to 
correlate with a decrease in the number and total length per synaptic apposition 
of the desmosome-like contacts, known as actin-containing structures, as 
compared with unstimulated control preparations.
In addition, experimental 
preparations were characterized with unusual quantity of asymmetric 
desmosome-like contacts, hemidesmosome, whose number during a long-term 
depression became 4 fold higher than in the control synapses.
The data obtained 
support our recent suggestion on the role of filamentous actin in induction and 
long-term maintenance of enhanced electrotonic conductivity at mixed synapses.
PMID: 10496020 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
STUDIES ON LYMPHOID ACTIVITY <jats:p>It has been shown that resistance to transplanted cancer follows stimulation of the lymphoid tissue when the stimulation is induced by either heat or small doses of x-rays. In this paper we have attempted to determine whether the degree of immunity had a quantitative relation to the amount of the stimulation. Fortunately
 the two methods at our disposal give stimulation of markedly different characters.
The small dose of x-rays gives a sluggish lymphoid cell reaction of short duration with a definite latent period between the treatment and the evidence of marked stimulation, while after heat a short period of depression is followed by a sharp stimulation continuing over a much longer period.
The cancer inoculation into groups of mice made immediately after exposure to x-rays shows little resistance, while the inoculation made at the height of the stimulation phase shows a definite increase in the immunity.
Animals inoculated with cancer immediately after the heat treatment exhibit a pronounced immunity, but not so marked as that shown when the inoculation is made at the height of the stimulation.</jats:p>
               <jats:p>The amount of resistance shown when the cancer inoculation is made at the height of the moderately stimulating effect following exposure to x-rays, is much less than that seen when the inoculation is made at the height of the heat effect when the degree of stimulation is much greater.
When the lymphocytosis sets in after the tumor graft is established only a slight effect is noted.
All these results together are taken to indicate that the degree of immunity is dependent on the amount of lymphoid stimulation existing either at the time of or following soon after the cancer inoculation.</jats:p>
Effect of Exogenous Interferon Treatment on Mouse Mammary Tumors&lt;xref ref-type="fn" rid="FN1"&gt;1&lt;/xref&gt; 1. J Natl Cancer Inst. 1972 Apr;48(4):1151-4.

Effect of exogenous interferon treatment on mouse mammary tumors.

Came PE
 Moore DH.
PMID: 4336879 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The inhibitory effect of ethanol on retinol oxidation by human liver and cattle retina 1. Exp Mol Pathol. 1971 Oct;15(2):148-56. doi: 10.1016/0014-4800(71)90095-5.

The inhibitory effect of ethanol on retinol oxidation by human liver and cattle 
retina.

Mezey E
 Holt PR.
DOI: 10.1016/0014-4800(71)90095-5
PMID: 4398759 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pharmacological inhibition of the lateral habenula improves depressive-like behavior in an animal model of treatment resistant depression 1. Behav Brain Res. 2011 Jan 1;216(1):463-5. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.07.034. Epub
 2010 Aug 3.

Pharmacological inhibition of the lateral habenula improves depressive-like 
behavior in an animal model of treatment resistant depression.

Winter C(1)
 Vollmayr B, Djodari-Irani A, Klein J, Sartorius A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Psychiatry and Psychotherapy, Technical University Dresden, 
Dresden, Germany.
Identifying new treatment approaches for treatment resistant depression (TRD) is 
an important topic for translational psychiatry.
Functional inhibition of the 
lateral habenula (LHb) has recently been claimed to offer such an option for 
TRD.
Rats which are bred for high susceptibility to develop learned helplessness 
provide a genetic model for TRD.
We used the gamma-aminobutyric acid agonist 
muscimol to inhibit the LHb in Sprague-Dawley rats with congenital learned 
helplessness (cLH).
Stereotactic pharmacological inhibition of the LHb exerted 
antidepressive effects in treatment resistant cLH rats.
Copyright © 2010 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2010.07.034
PMID: 20678526 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Abrupt changes in pentobarbital sensitivity in preBötzinger complex region
 hypoglossal motor nucleus, nucleus tractus solitarius, and cortex during rat transitional period (P10–P15) 1.
Respir Physiol Neurobiol.
2015 Feb 1;207:61-71. doi:
10.1016/j.resp.2014.12.016.
Epub 2014 Dec 27.
Abrupt changes in pentobarbital sensitivity in preBötzinger complex region, 
hypoglossal motor nucleus, nucleus tractus solitarius, and cortex during rat 
transitional period (P10-P15).
Turner SM(1), Johnson SM(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Comparative Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, United States.
(2)Department of Comparative Biosciences, School of Veterinary Medicine, 
University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI 53706, United States.
Electronic address: 
johnsons@svm.vetmed.wisc.edu.
On postnatal days P10-P15 in rat medulla, neurotransmitter receptor subunit 
composition shifts toward a more mature phenotype.
Since medullary GABAARs 
regulate cardiorespiratory function, abrupt alterations in GABAergic synaptic 
inhibition could disrupt homeostasis.
We hypothesized that GABAARs on medullary 
neurons become more resistant to positive allosteric modulation during P10-P15.
Medullary and cortical slices from P10 to P20 rats were used to record 
spontaneous action potentials in pre-Botzinger Complex (preBötC-region), 
hypoglossal (XII) motor nucleus, nucleus tractus solitarius (NTS), and cortex 
during exposure to pentobarbital (positive allosteric modulator of GABAARs).
On 
P14, pentobarbital resistance abruptly increased in preBötC-region and decreased 
in NTS, but these changes in pentobarbital resistance were not present on P15.
Pentobarbital resistance decreased in XII motor nucleus during P11-P15 with a 
nadir at P14.
Abrupt changes in pentobarbital resistance indicate changes in 
GABAergic receptor composition and function that may compensate for potential 
increased GABAergic inhibition and respiratory depression that occurs during 
this key developmental transitional period.
Copyright © 2014 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.resp.2014.12.016
PMCID: PMC4304098
PMID: 25550216 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Long-term potentiation in the dentate gyrus: induction and increased glutamate release are blocked by d(−)aminophosphonovalerate 1. Neuroscience. 1987 Jan;20(1):279-84. doi: 10.1016/0306-4522(87)90019-4.

Long-term potentiation in the dentate gyrus: induction and increased glutamate 
release are blocked by D(-)aminophosphonovalerate.

Errington ML
 Lynch MA, Bliss TV.
D(-)Aminophosphonovalerate, a specific antagonist of the N-methyl-D-aspartate 
subtype of glutamate receptor, was perfused through a push-pull cannula into the 
dentate gyrus of rats anaesthetized with urethan in order to observe its effect 
on the induction and maintenance of long-term potentiation and on the increase 
in release of endogenous glutamate associated with long-term potentiation.
The 
amplitude of the population spike evoked by single test shocks to the perforant 
path was significantly depressed by 100 microM D(-)aminophosphonovalerate, but 
there was a minimal effect on the slope of the population excitatory 
postsynaptic potential, or on the concentration of glutamate released into the 
perfusate.
A brief high-intensity tetanus given to the perforant path while 
D(-)aminophosphono-valerate was being perfused failed to induce long-term 
potentiation or the sustained increase in glutamate release associated with 
long-term potentiation.
Short-term post-tetanic potentiation was not affected.
After wash-out of D(-)aminophosphonovalerate, a second high-frequency train 
produced both long-term potentiation and an increase in glutamate release which 
was sustained for the subsequent 1 h period of observation.
D(-)Aminophosphonovalerate did not suppress long-term potentiation once it had 
been induced.
D(-)Aminophosphonovalerate (100 microM) did not itself affect in 
vivo release of glutamate.
However, in a separate series of in vitro 
experiments, D(-)aminophosphonovalerate at concentrations of 50 microM and above 
was found to depress the Ca2+ -dependent, K+-stimulated release of preloaded 
[14C]-glutamate from dentate slices.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

DOI: 10.1016/0306-4522(87)90019-4
PMID: 2882444 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Positive Allosteric Interaction of Structurally Diverse T-Type Calcium Channel Antagonists 1. Cell Biochem Biophys. 2009;55(2):81-93. doi: 10.1007/s12013-009-9057-4. Epub 
2009 Jul 7.

Positive allosteric interaction of structurally diverse T-type calcium channel 
antagonists.

Uebele VN(1)
 Nuss CE, Fox SV, Garson SL, Cristescu R, Doran SM, Kraus RL, 
Santarelli VP, Li Y, Barrow JC, Yang ZQ, Schlegel KA, Rittle KE, Reger TS, 
Bednar RA, Lemaire W, Mullen FA, Ballard JE, Tang C, Dai G, McManus OB, Koblan 
KS, Renger JJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Depression and Circadian Disorders, Merck Research 
Laboratories, West Point, PA 19486, USA.
victor_uebele@merck.com

Low-voltage-activated (T-type) calcium channels play a role in diverse 
physiological responses including neuronal burst firing, hormone secretion, and 
cell growth.
To better understand the biological role and therapeutic potential 
of the target, a number of structurally diverse antagonists have been 
identified.
Multiple drug interaction sites have been identified for L-type 
calcium channels, suggesting a similar possibility exists for the structurally 
related T-type channels.
Here, we radiolabel a novel amide T-type calcium 
channel antagonist (TTA-A1) and show that several known antagonists, including 
mibefradil, flunarizine, and pimozide, displace binding in a 
concentration-dependent manner.
Further, we identify a novel quinazolinone 
T-type antagonist (TTA-Q4) that enhanced amide radioligand binding, increased 
affinity in a saturable manner and slowed dissociation.
Functional evaluation 
showed these compounds to be state-dependent antagonists which show a positive 
allosteric interaction.
Consistent with slowing dissociation, the duration of 
efficacy was prolonged when compounds were co-administered to WAG/Rij rats, a 
genetic model of absence epilepsy.
The development of a T-type calcium channel 
radioligand has been used to demonstrate structurally distinct TTAs interact at 
allosteric sites and to confirm the potential for synergistic inhibition of 
T-type calcium channels with structurally diverse antagonists.
DOI: 10.1007/s12013-009-9057-4
PMID: 19582593 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Selectivity of acute feedback effects of corticosteroids on ACTH secretion. 1. UCLA Forum Med Sci. 1972;15:51-8.

Selectivity of acute feedback effects of corticosteroids on ACTH secretion.

Critchlow V.

PMID: 4342983 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Nitric Oxide Reduces Myocardial Contractility in Isoproterenol-Stimulated Rat Hearts by a Mechanism Independent of Cyclic GMP or Cyclic AMP 1. Pharmacology. 1997 Oct;55(4):202-10. doi: 10.1159/000139529.

Nitric oxide reduces myocardial contractility in isoproterenol-stimulated rat 
hearts by a mechanism independent of cyclic GMP or cyclic AMP.

Weiss HR(1)
 Sadoff JD, Scholz PM, Klabunde RE.
Author information:
(1)Department of Physiology and Biophysics, University of Medicine and Dentistry 
of New Jersey, Robert Wood Johnson Medical School, Piscataway 08854-5635, USA.
hweiss@umdnj.edu

Nitric oxide has been shown to decrease myocardial contractility and O2 
consumption.
This study was designed to evaluate the hypothesis that nitric 
oxide-mediated increases in cyclic GMP require elevated cyclic AMP to produce 
cardiac depression.
Using isolated, Langendorff-perfused rat hearts, we 
determined the effects of intracoronary nitroprusside (NP, 1 and 10 mM) in the 
absence and presence of isoproterenol (ISO, 10(-8) M) on cardiac function, O2 
consumption, cyclic GMP and cyclic AMP.
ISO, with and without NP, increased 
cyclic AMP (from 287 +/- 21 to 477 +/- 33 pmol/g) without altering cyclic GMP.
Left-ventricular pressure increased from 97 +/- 12 to 178 +/- 9 mm Hg and 
dP/dtmax from 1,786 +/- 275 to 4,049 +/- 354 mm Hg/s.
NP increased cyclic GMP 
(from 4 to 30 pmol/g) in both the absence and presence of ISO, but NP did not 
alter cyclic AMP.
Without ISO, NP insignificantly altered left-ventricular 
pressure; however, in the presence of ISO, NP significantly decreased 
left-ventricular pressure by -25 +/- 4 mm Hg and decreased dP/dtmax by -619 +/- 
142 mm Hg/s.
Isoproterenol increased O2 consumption, but the changes with NP 
were not significant.
When this study was repeated in the presence of LY83583, a 
guanylate cyclase inhibitor, NP still produced cardiac depression in the 
presence of ISO.
Therefore, cardiodepressant effects of NP were only observed 
against a background of inotropic stimulation with ISO.
However, effects of NP 
on contractility were unrelated to increases in cyclic GMP or cyclic GMP-induced 
changes in cyclic AMP.
DOI: 10.1159/000139529
PMID: 9396080 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Editorial: Somatostatin (somatotrophin release inhibiting factor). 1. S Afr Med J. 1974 Jun 12;48(28):1180.

Editorial: Somatostatin (somatotrophin release inhibiting factor).

[No authors listed]

PMID: 4599981 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Failure to Recognize Novelty after Extended Methamphetamine Self-Administration Results from Loss of Long-Term Depression in the Perirhinal Cortex 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2015 Oct;40(11):2526-35. doi: 10.1038/npp.2015.99.
Epub  2015 Apr 13.

Failure to Recognize Novelty after Extended Methamphetamine Self-Administration 
Results from Loss of Long-Term Depression in the Perirhinal Cortex.

Scofield MD(1)
 Trantham-Davidson H(1), Schwendt M(2), Leong KC(1), Peters J(1), 
See RE(1), Reichel CM(1).
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, Medical University of South Carolina, 
Charleston, SC, USA.
(2)Department of Psychology, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL, USA.
Exposure to methamphetamine (meth) can produce lasting memory impairments in 
humans and rodents.
We recently demonstrated that extended access meth 
self-administration results in novel object recognition (NOR) memory deficits in 
rats.
Recognition of novelty depends upon intact perirhinal (pRh) cortex 
function, which is compromised by meth-induced downregulation of 
GluN2B-containing N-methyl-D-aspartate (NMDA) receptors.
NMDA receptors 
containing this subunit have a critical role in pRh long-term depression (LTD), 
one of the primary physiological processes thought to underlie object 
recognition memory.
We hypothesized that meth-induced downregulation of GluN2B 
receptors would compromise pRh LTD, leading to loss of NOR memory.
We found that 
meth self-administration resulted in an inability to induce pRh LTD following 
1 Hz stimulation, an effect that was reversed with bath application of the NMDA 
receptor partial agonist D-cycloserine (DCS).
In addition, pRh microinfusion of 
DCS restored meth-induced memory deficits.
Furthermore, blockade of 
GluN2B-containing NMDA receptors with Ro 25-6981 prevented DCS restoration of 
pRh LTD in meth subjects.
Thus, targeting pRh LTD may be a promising strategy to 
treat meth-induced cognitive impairment.
DOI: 10.1038/npp.2015.99
PMCID: PMC4569960
PMID: 25865928 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Synergistic value of fibrinolysis and hypothermic aerobic preservation with oxygen in the protection of livers from non–heart-beating donors: An experimental model 1. Transplant Proc. 2004 Dec;36(10):2927-30. doi: 
10.1016/j.transproceed.2004.11.094.

Synergistic value of fibrinolysis and hypothermic aerobic preservation with 
oxygen in the protection of livers from non-heart-beating donors: an 
experimental model.

Tolba RH(1)
 Yonezawa K, Song S, Burger C, Minor T.

Author information:
(1)University of Bonn Medical Center, Bonn, Germany.
The chronic organ shortage has led to the reconsideration of marginal donor 
pools such as non-heart-beating donors (NHBD).
The use of these livers is 
limited due to their minimal tolerance for cold preservation.
The aim of this 
study was to examine the combination of two different therapeutic strategies for 
the preservation of livers from NHBD.
The livers of male Wistar rats were 
harvested after the induction of cardiac arrest via phrenotomy (30, 90 minutes).
Livers were perfused with 10 mL of UW solution (UW), followed by hypothermic 
preservation with or without insufflation of gaseous oxygen (O2).
In one group a 
fibrinolytic preflush (10 mL of Ringer's containing 7500 IU of streptokinase) 
was performed with subsequent preservation with O2 (O2+SK).
After storage (24 
h/4 degrees C/UW) livers were reperfused in vitro.
Livers retrieved from heart 
beating donors served as controls.
The results showed that even after only 30 
minutes of warm ischemia livers displayed a serious disturbance in vascular 
perfusion (portal venous pressure, PVP = 7.4 +/- 0.2* versus control: 4.1 +/- 
0.5 mmHg), associated with a more than 10-fold increase in enzyme release (ALT: 
26819 +/- 513* versus control 683 +/- 152 mU/g/L), which was consistent with a 
significant depression in bile synthesis (1.21 +/- 0.35* versus 19.36 +/- 2.16 
microL/g/45 min).
However, these impairments could be prevented with O2.
Even 
after 90 minutes of WI, the function was significant better using aerobic 
preservation (ALT: 3204 +/- 549 mU/g/L).
With a supplementary fibrinolytic 
preflush, we effectively preserved livers up to 90 minutes of WI with results 
comparable to livers from heart beating donors with no WI (ALT: 1623 +/- 432 
mU/g/L).
The combination of these two techniques represents a new therapeutic 
approach for livers with extended or unclear WI periods in non-heart-beating 
donors (*P <.05 versus control).
DOI: 10.1016/j.transproceed.2004.11.094
PMID: 15686662 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Service use by Australian children for emotional and behavioural problems: Findings from the second Australian Child and Adolescent Survey of Mental Health and Wellbeing <jats:sec><jats:title>Objective:</jats:title><jats:p> To identify the proportion of children and adolescents in Australia and the proportion of those with mental disorders who used services for emotional and behavioural problems
 the type of services used and what characteristics were associated with service use.
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Method:</jats:title><jats:p> During 2013–2014, a national face-to-face household survey of mental health and wellbeing (Young Minds Matter) was conducted, involving 6310 parents and carers of 4- to 17-year-olds (55% of eligible households) and self-report surveys from 2967 11- to 17-year-olds in these households (89% of eligible youth).
The survey identified 12-month mental disorders based on the Diagnostic Interview Schedule for Children–Version IV and asked about service use for emotional or behavioural problems in the previous 12 months.
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results:</jats:title><jats:p> Overall, 17.0% of all 4- to 17-year-olds used services for emotional or behavioural problems in the previous 12 months.
Of those with mental disorders, 56.0% used services (48.9% of 4- to 11-year-olds; 65.1% of 12- to 17-year-olds).
Service use was highest among 4- to 17-year-olds with major depressive disorder (79.6%) and lowest for those with attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (52.7%).
Two-fifths (41.2%), 72.5% and 87.6% of those with mild, moderate and severe disorders used services.
General practitioners, psychologists, paediatricians and counsellors/family therapists were the most commonly accessed health service providers.
Two-fifths with mental disorders had attended school services.
About 5% of adolescents reported use of online personal support or counselling for help with their problems.
From multivariate models, service use was higher in sole carer families, but also among those living in the least socially and economically disadvantaged compared to the most disadvantaged areas.
</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusion:</jats:title><jats:p> Rates of service use for mental disorders in Australia’s children and adolescents appear to have increased substantially.
Health services and schools are the major providers of services for emotional and behavioural problems, but telephone counselling and online services have become well-established parts of the service environment.
</jats:p></jats:sec>
Positive and Negative Contractile Effects of Somatostatin-14 on Rat Ventricular Cardiomyocytes 1. J Cardiovasc Pharmacol. 2001 Mar;37(3):324-32. doi: 
10.1097/00005344-200103000-00011.

Positive and negative contractile effects of somatostatin-14 on rat ventricular 
cardiomyocytes.

Murray F(1)
 Bell D, Kelso EJ, Millar BC, McDermott BJ.
Author information:
(1)Department of Therapeutics and Pharmacology, The Centre for Cardiovascular 
and Genetics Research, School of Medicine, The Queen's University of Belfast, 
Northern Ireland, UK.
Somatostatin-14 elicits negative inotropic and chronotropic actions in atrial 
myocardium.
Less is known about the effects of somatostatin-14 in ventricular 
myocardium.
The direct contractile effects of somatostatin-14 were assessed 
using ventricular cardiomyocytes isolated from the hearts of adult rats.
Cells 
were stimulated at 0.5 Hz with CaCl2 (2 mM) under basal conditions and in the 
presence of the beta-adrenoceptor agonist, isoprenaline (1 nM), or the selective 
inhibitor of the transient outward current (Ito), 4-aminopyridine (500 microM).
Somatostatin-14 did not alter basal contractile response but it did inhibit 
(IC50 = 13 nM) the response to isoprenaline (1 nM).
In the presence of 
4-aminopyridine (500 microM), somatostatin-14 stimulated a positive contractile 
response (EC50 = 118 fM) that was attenuated markedly by diltiazem (100 nM).
These data indicate that somatostatin-14 exerts dual effects directly in rat 
ventricular cardiomyocytes: (1) a negative contractile effect, observed in the 
presence of isoprenaline (1 nM), coupled to activation of Ito; and (2) a 
previously unreported and very potent positive contractile effect, unmasked by 
4-aminopyridine (500 microM), coupled to the influx of calcium ions via L-type 
calcium channels.
The greater potency of somatostatin-14 for producing the 
positive contractile effect indicates that the peptide may exert a predominantly 
stimulatory influence on the resting contractility of ventricular myocardium in 
vivo, whereas the negative contractile effect, observed at much higher 
concentrations, could indicate that localized elevations in the concentration of 
the peptide may serve as a negative regulatory influence to limit the 
detrimental effects of excessive stimulation of cardiomyocyte contractility.
DOI: 10.1097/00005344-200103000-00011
PMID: 11243423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Protein Turnover in Skeletal Muscle 1. J Biol Chem. 1969 Jun 25;244(12):3223-9.

Protein turnover in skeletal muscle. II. Effects of denervation and cortisone on 
protein catabolism in skeletal muscle.

Goldberg AL.

PMID: 5792658 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pivotal Role of gp91
            <sup>
              <i>phox</i>
            </sup>
            -Containing NADH Oxidase in Lipopolysaccharide-Induced Tumor Necrosis Factor-α Expression and Myocardial Depression <jats:p>
            <jats:bold>
              <jats:italic>Background—</jats:italic>
            </jats:bold>
            Lipopolysaccharide (LPS) induces cardiomyocyte tumor necrosis factor-α (TNF-α) production
 which is responsible for myocardial depression during sepsis.
The aim of this study was to investigate the role of gp91
            <jats:sup>
              <jats:italic>phox</jats:italic>
            </jats:sup>
            -containing NADH oxidase signaling in cardiomyocyte TNF-α expression and myocardial dysfunction induced by LPS.
</jats:p>
          <jats:p>
            <jats:bold>
              <jats:italic>Methods and Results—</jats:italic>
            </jats:bold>
            In cultured mouse neonatal cardiomyocytes, LPS increased NADH oxidase (gp91
            <jats:sup>
              <jats:italic>phox</jats:italic>
            </jats:sup>
            subunit) expression and superoxide generation.
Deficiency of gp91
            <jats:sup>
              <jats:italic>phox</jats:italic>
            </jats:sup>
            or inhibition of NADH oxidase blocked TNF-α expression stimulated by LPS.
TNF-α induction was also inhibited by tempol,
            <jats:italic>N</jats:italic>
            -acetylcysteine, or 1,3-dimethyl-2-thiourea.
NADH oxidase activation by LPS increased ERK1/2 and p38 phosphorylation, and inhibition of ERK1/2 and p38 phosphorylation blocked the effect of NADH oxidase on TNF-α expression.
Isolated mouse hearts were perfused with LPS (5 μg/mL) alone or in the presence of apocynin for 1 hour.
Myocardial TNF-α production was decreased in gp91
            <jats:sup>
              <jats:italic>phox</jats:italic>
            </jats:sup>
            -deficient or apocynin-treated hearts compared with those of wild type (
            <jats:italic>P</jats:italic>
            &lt;0.05).
To investigate the role of gp91
            <jats:sup>
              <jats:italic>phox</jats:italic>
            </jats:sup>
            -containing NADH oxidase in endotoxemia, mice were treated with LPS (4 mg/kg IP) for 4 and 24 hours, and their heart function was measured with a Langendorff system.
Deficiency of gp91
            <jats:sup>
              <jats:italic>phox</jats:italic>
            </jats:sup>
            significantly attenuated LPS-induced myocardial depression (
            <jats:italic>P</jats:italic>
            &lt;0.05).
</jats:p>
          <jats:p>
            <jats:bold>
              <jats:italic>Conclusions—</jats:italic>
            </jats:bold>
            gp91
            <jats:sup>
              <jats:italic>phox</jats:italic>
            </jats:sup>
            -Containing NADH oxidase is pivotal in LPS-induced TNF-α expression and cardiac depression.
Effects of NADH oxidase activation are mediated by ERK1/2 and p38 MAPK pathway.
The present results suggest that gp91
            <jats:sup>
              <jats:italic>phox</jats:italic>
            </jats:sup>
            -containing NADH oxidase may represent a potential therapeutic target for myocardial dysfunction in sepsis.
</jats:p>
Time course and calcium dependence of transmitter release at a single ribbon synapse <jats:p>
            At the first synapse in the auditory pathway
 the receptor potential of mechanosensory hair cells is converted into a firing pattern in auditory nerve fibers.
For the accurate coding of timing and intensity of sound signals, transmitter release at this synapse must occur with the highest precision.
To measure directly the transfer characteristics of the hair cell afferent synapse, we implemented simultaneous whole-cell recordings from mammalian inner hair cells (IHCs) and auditory nerve fiber terminals that typically receive input from a single ribbon synapse.
During a 1-s IHC depolarization, the synaptic response depressed &gt;90%, representing the main source for adaptation in the auditory nerve.
Synaptic depression was slightly affected by α-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazolepropionic acid receptor desensitization; however, it was mostly caused by reduced vesicular release.
When the transfer function between transmitter release and Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            influx was tested at constant open probability for Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            channels (potentials &gt;0 mV), a super linear relation was found.
This relation is presumed to result from the cooperative binding of three to four Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            ions at the Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            sensor.
However, in the physiological range for receptor potentials (−50 to −30 mV), the relation between Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            influx and afferent activity was linear, assuring minimal distortion in the coding of sound intensity.
Changes in Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            influx caused an increase in release probability, but not in the average size of multivesicular synaptic events.
By varying Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            buffering in the IHC, we further investigate how Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            channel and Ca
            <jats:sup>2+</jats:sup>
            sensor at this synapse might relate.
</jats:p>
[Role of serotonin-sensitive structures in the central nervous system in the development of compensatory adrenal hypertrophy]. 1. Probl Endokrinol (Mosk). 1972 Sep-Oct;18(5):69-72.

[Role of serotonin-sensitive structures in the central nervous system in the 
development of compensatory adrenal hypertrophy].

[Article in Russian]

Drzhevetskaia IA.

PMID: 4367008 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Effect of a new monoquaternary pyridiniumoxime on uninhibited and by highly toxic organophosphate inhibited acetylcholinesterase in vitro]. 1. Arzneimittelforschung. 1970 Jun;20(6):774-6.

[Effect of a new monoquaternary pyridiniumoxime on uninhibited and by highly 
toxic organophosphate inhibited acetylcholinesterase in vitro].

[Article in German]

Kuhnen H.

PMID: 5468892 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Chronic variable stress impairs energy metabolism in prefrontal cortex and hippocampus of rats: prevention by chronic antioxidant treatment 1. Metab Brain Dis. 2010 Jun;25(2):169-76. doi: 10.1007/s11011-010-9194-x. Epub 
2010 May 27.

Chronic variable stress impairs energy metabolism in prefrontal cortex and 
hippocampus of rats: prevention by chronic antioxidant treatment.

Tagliari B(1)
 Noschang CG, Ferreira AG, Ferrari OA, Feksa LR, Wannmacher CM, 
Dalmaz C, Wyse AT.
Author information:
(1)Laboratório de Neuroproteção e Doenças Metabólicas, Porto Alegre, RS, CEP 
90035-003, Brasil.
Since chronic stress has been used widely for studying clinical depression and 
that brain energy metabolism and oxidative stress might be involved in the 
pathophysiology of this illness, the objective of this study was investigate the 
activities of pyruvate kinase, complex II and IV (cytocrome c oxidase) in 
hippocampus and prefrontal cortex of rats submitted to chronic variable stress.
We also evaluated if vitamins E and C administration could prevent such effects.
During 40 days adult rats from the stressed group were subjected to one stressor 
per day, at a different time each day, in order to minimize predictability.
The 
stressed group had gained less weight while its immobilization time in the 
forced swimming test was greater than that of the control group.
Results showed 
that stressed group presented an inhibition in the activities of complex II and 
cytochrome c oxidase in prefrontal cortex, while in hippocampus just complex IV 
was inhibited.
Pyruvate kinase activity was not altered in stressed group when 
compared to control.
Vitamins E and C administration prevented the alterations 
on respiratory chain caused by stress.
These data suggest that the impairment of 
energy metabolism and oxidative stress could be related with the pathogenic 
pathways in stress related disorders.
DOI: 10.1007/s11011-010-9194-x
PMID: 20505986 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Comparison of the effects of some C27−
 C21−, and C19-steroids upon hepatic sterol synthesis and hydroxymethylglutaryl—CoA reductase activity 1.
Arch Biochem Biophys.
1970 Sep;140(1):122-30. doi:
10.1016/0003-9861(70)90016-0.
Comparison of the effects of some C27-, C21-, and C19-steroids upon hepatic 
sterol synthesis and hydroxymethylglutaryl-CoA reductase activity.
Kandutsch AA, Packie RM.
DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(70)90016-0
PMID: 5460174 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of the dietary manganese level on tissue manganese
 iron, copper and zinc concentrations in female rats and their fetuses.
1.
Med Biol.
1975 Apr;53(2):93-9.
Effect of the dietary manganese level on tissue manganese, iron, copper and zinc 
concentrations in female rats and their fetuses.
Järvinen R, Ahlström A.
In order to study the effect of dietary manganese on the content of manganese, 
iron, copper and zinc in maternal and fetal tissues, six diets with different 
levels of manganese (4, 24, 54, 154, 504 and 1004 mg Mn/kg dry diet) were fed to 
Sprague-Dawley female rats from the time of weaning.
The animals were mated and 
the offspring collected by cesarean section at day 21 of pregnancy.
Non-pregnant 
female rats served as respective reference groups.
Concentrations of copper as 
well as manganese were higher in the livers of pregnant rats with the highest 
manganese intake, whereas in non-pregnant animals the dietary manganese level 
had no appreciable effect on manganese or copper concentrations in the liver.
On 
the other hand, the iron content of the livers of both pregnant and non-pregnant 
female rats fell as the manganese level of the diet increased.
The hemoglobin 
values of dams on the highest levels of dietary manganese were also slightly 
reduced.
The manganese content was highest in the offspring of dams given the 
largest amounts of manganese.
The manganese level in the maternal diet had the 
opposite effect on the fetal iron concentration, and the zinc content of fetuses 
of dams on the highest dietary manganese level was slightly elevated.
No gross 
malformations or bone structure anomalies could be observed in the fetuses, and 
the manganese intake of the dams was not found to have influenced essentially 
the fetal weights and the dry matter and ash contents.
PMID: 1152553 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Ocular Action of an Opioid Peptide
 DPDPE 1.
J Ocul Pharmacol Ther.
1996 Summer;12(2):131-9. doi: 10.1089/jop.1996.12.131.
Ocular action of an opioid peptide, DPDPE.
Wang D(1), Potter DE.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, Morehouse School of Medicine, 
Atlanta, Georgia, USA.
This study was performed to examine some ocular actions of an opioid agonist.
Experiments were performed to evaluate the effects of a delta opioid agonist, 
DPDPE ([D-pen2, D-pen5]enkephalin (where pen = penicillamine)), on: 1) 
intraocular pressure (IOP) in rabbits; 2) cAMP accumulation in rabbit iris 
ciliary bodies (ICBs).
Unilateral, topical administration of DPDPE caused 
bilateral depression of IOP.
Intravitreal injection of DPDPE caused a greater 
IOP decrease than intravitreal injection of NaH2PO4 (vehicle).
Topical 
administration of naloxone partially inhibited the effect of DPDPE on IOP in 
normal rabbits.
In other experiments, DPDPE suppressed both basal and 
isoproterenol (ISO)-stimulated cAMP accumulation in ICBs.
The presence of 
naltrindole (NTI), a delta receptor antagonist, did not prevent the suppression 
of cAMP levels by DPDPE.
The conclusions drawn from the findings suggest that 
the lowering of IOP by DPDPE is mediated, in part, by actions at postjunctional 
(ciliary body) sites and may involve an atypical opioid receptor.
DOI: 10.1089/jop.1996.12.131
PMID: 8773929 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
ChemInform Abstract: 1
4‐BENZODIAZEPINES.
VIII.
CENTRAL DEPRESSIVE ACTIVITY AND SPASMOLYTIC ACTION N OF ISOQUINO(2,1‐D)(1,4)BENZODIAZEPINES.
STRUCTURE‐ACTIVITY RELATIONSHIPS <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>Von den früher hergestellten Benzodiazepinen der Formeln (I)‐(IV) wirken einige Verbindungen des Typs (II) dämgfend auf das ZNS.</jats:p>
Effect of Triacontanol on Numbers and Functions of Cells Involved in Inflammatory Responses 1. Proc Soc Exp Biol Med. 1992 Jul;200(3):349-52. doi:
10.3181/00379727-200-43441.

Effect of triacontanol on numbers and functions of cells involved in 
inflammatory responses.

Warren RP(1)
 Burger RA, Sidwell RW, Clark LL.
Author information:
(1)Developmental Center for Handicapped Persons, Utah State University, Logan 
84322.
A preparation of a triacontanol-containing compound was studied for its effect 
on cells involved in the inflammatory response.
C57BL/6 mice were injected 
intraperitoneally with various concentrations of this compound and investigated 
for total body weight, wet weight of thymus tissue, number of thymus cells and 
splenocytes, interleukin 1 production of spleen monocytes, and response of 
splenocytes to the T cell mitogen, phytohemagglutinin.
Mice treated with the 
triacontanol preparation exhibited decreased total body weight, 24% reduction in 
thymus weights, 39% decrease in the number of thymus cells, and 21% depression 
in total splenocytes.
Splenic monocytes of these animals produced a 
significantly reduced amount of interleukin 1 and splenocytes had a 
significantly depressed response to phytohemagglutinin.
It is concluded that 
triacontanol has an inhibitory effect on at least some of the cells responsible 
for inflammation.
DOI: 10.3181/00379727-200-43441
PMID: 1615010 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Influence du Biebrich Scarlet sur la cinétique de lyse de Micrococcus lysodeikticus par plusieurs lysozymes 1. Biochimie. 1972;54(10):1375-6. doi: 10.1016/s0300-9084(72)80077-4.

[Influence of Biebrich Scarlet on the lysis kinetics of Micrococcus 
lysodeikticus by several lysozymes].

[Article in French]

Saint-Blancard J
 Allary M, Jollès P.

DOI: 10.1016/s0300-9084(72)80077-4
PMID: 4654570 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Transfusion of type-A and type-B blood to cats. 1. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1991 Feb 1;198(3):411-8.

Transfusion of type-A and type-B blood to cats.

Giger U(1)
 Bücheler J.
Author information:
(1)Department of Clinical Studies, School of Veterinary Medicine, University of 
Pennsylvania, Philadelphia 19104-6010.
Although nearly all domestic shorthair and longhair cats have type-A blood 
(greater than 99%), the frequency of blood type B in various feline breeds 
ranges from 0 to 59%.
All blood-type-B cats have strong natural alloantibodies, 
predominantly of the IgM class, whereas blood-type-A cats have low alloantibody 
titers of the IgG and IgM classes.
We therefore studied the efficacy and safety 
of transfusing 20 ml of matched and mismatched 14C-potassium cyanate-labeled 
blood to cats.
In autologous and allogeneic matched transfusions of blood-type-A 
and type-B cats, the half-life of labeled erythrocytes proved to be similar (29 
to 39 days).
In contrast, type-B erythrocytes transfused into 5 blood-type-A 
cats had a mean (+/- SD) half-life of only 2.1 +/- 0.2 days and induced minor 
transfusion reactions.
Half of the type-A blood given to 4 blood-type-B cats was 
destroyed within minutes to 6 hours (mean +/- SD = 1.3 +/- 2.3 hours), depending 
on the alloantibody titer.
After 1 day, none of the labeled erythrocytes were 
detected.
Mismatched transfusions in blood-type-B cats caused marked transient 
reactions including systemic anaphylactic signs (hypotension, bradycardia, 
apnea, urination, defecation, vomiting, and severe neurologic depression) and 
hemolytic signs (hemoglobinemia and pigmenturia) associated with severe 
reduction in plasma alloantibody titer and complement activity.
(ABSTRACT 
TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS)

PMID: 2010334 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Integrated quality control project: Relationships between pathological findings detected at the slaughterhouse and information gathered in a veterinary health scheme at pig farms 1. Vet Q. 1994 Jul;16(2):123-7. doi: 10.1080/01652176.1994.9694432.

Integrated quality control project: relationships between pathological findings 
detected at the slaughterhouse and information gathered in a veterinary health 
scheme at pig farms.

Blocks GH(1)
 Vernooy JC, Verheijden JH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Herd Health and Reproduction, Faculty of Veterinary Medicine, 
Utrecht University, The Netherlands.
In September 1986 an Integrated Quality Control Project (IQC) was started in the 
Netherlands.
Over a period of 2 years a veterinary herd health scheme was 
applied to 21 growing and finishing pig herds.
Information was collected 
concerning medical treatment, classified as group treatment and individual 
treatment, clinical observations, and housing factors.
The main purpose of this 
project was to investigate relationships between pathological findings detected 
at the slaughterhouse and information gathered on the farm.
Medical group 
treatments, clinical observations and housing did not reliably predict 
pathological findings.
Individual medical treatment for respiratory disorders, 
started in the last 30 days before slaughter, proved to be positively related to 
the pathological findings 'pneumonia' and 'pleuritis' detected at the 
slaughterhouse.
This may be useful for selecting pigs at the slaughterhouse that 
will require special treatment for the removal of the pleura parietalis.
During 
the first year of the project the average daily gain (ADG) was 27.2 g. more than 
during the preceding 2 years (P < 0.0001).
Coughing was negatively related with 
the ADG.
More than 75 coughs per compartment during 10 minutes, recorded more 
than 50 days before slaughter, was positively related to a depression of the ADG 
(20 g; P < 0.05).
Relationships between group medical treatments and ADG were 
statistically significant, when the group medical treatment was started more 
than 20 days before slaughter.
Negative influences on the ADG were higher if the 
treatment was started closer to the slaughter date.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

DOI: 10.1080/01652176.1994.9694432
PMID: 7985354 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Temazepam Triggers the Release of Vasopressin into the Rat Hypothalamic Paraventricular Nucleus: Novel Insight into Benzodiazepine Action on Hypothalamic–Pituitary–Adrenocortical System Activity During Stress 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2006 Dec;31(12):2573-9. doi: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301006. 
Epub 2006 Jan 4.

Temazepam triggers the release of vasopressin into the rat hypothalamic 
paraventricular nucleus: novel insight into benzodiazepine action on 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical system activity during stress.

Welt T(1)
 Engelmann M, Renner U, Erhardt A, Müller MB, Landgraf R, Holsboer F, 
Keck ME.
Author information:
(1)Max Planck Institute of Psychiatry, Munich, Germany.
We investigated the influence of a representative classical benzodiazepine on 
the regulation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenocortical (HPA) axis activity 
both under basal conditions and stress.
Adult male Wistar rats were 
intravenously administered with temazepam (0.5, 1, and 3 mg/kg body weight) and 
plasma concentrations of corticotropin (ACTH) and vasopressin (AVP) were 
measured in blood samples collected via chronically implanted jugular venous 
catheters.
Simultaneously, the release of AVP within the hypothalamic 
paraventricular nucleus (PVN) was monitored via microdialysis.
Plasma AVP levels 
remained unaffected by the different treatment conditions.
Temazepam blunted the 
stressor exposure-induced secretion of ACTH in a dose-dependent manner.
Concurrently, and also in a dose-dependent manner temazepam enhanced the 
intra-PVN release of AVP, known to originate from magnocellular neurons of the 
hypothalamic neurohypophyseal system.
Furthermore, temazepam did not affect the 
in vitro secretion of ACTH from the adenohypophyseal cells.
Taken together, the 
results of this study suggest that temazepam modulates the central nervous 
regulation of the HPA axis by altering intra-PVN AVP release.
An increasingly 
released AVP of magnocellular origin seems to provide a negative tonus on ACTH 
secretion most probably via inhibiting the release of ACTH secretagogues from 
the median eminence into hypophyseal portal blood.
DOI: 10.1038/sj.npp.1301006
PMID: 16395302 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Translational profiling of hypocretin neurons identifies candidate molecules for sleep regulation <jats:p>Hypocretin (orexin; Hcrt)-containing neurons of the hypothalamus are essential for the normal regulation of sleep and wake behaviors and have been implicated in feeding
 anxiety, depression, and reward.
The absence of these neurons causes narcolepsy in humans and model organisms.
However, little is known about the molecular phenotype of these cells; previous attempts at comprehensive profiling had only limited sensitivity or were inaccurate.
We generated a Hcrt translating ribosome affinity purification (bacTRAP) line for comprehensive translational profiling of all ribosome-bound transcripts in these neurons in vivo.
From this profile, we identified &gt;6000 transcripts detectably expressed above background and 188 transcripts that are highly enriched in these neurons, including all known markers of the cells.
Blinded analysis of in situ hybridization databases suggests that ∼60% of these are expressed in a Hcrt marker-like pattern.
Fifteen of these were confirmed with double labeling and microscopy, including the transcription factor <jats:italic>Lhx9</jats:italic>.
Ablation of this gene results in a &gt;30% loss specifically of Hcrt neurons, without a general disruption of hypothalamic development.
Polysomnography and activity monitoring revealed a profound hypersomnolence in these mice.
These data provide an in-depth and accurate profile of Hcrt neuron gene expression and suggest that <jats:italic>Lhx9</jats:italic> may be important for specification or survival of a subset of these cells.</jats:p>
Calretinin-positive L5a pyramidal neurons in the development of the paralemniscal pathway in the barrel cortex 1. Mol Brain. 2014 Nov 18;7:84. doi: 10.1186/s13041-014-0084-8.

Calretinin-positive L5a pyramidal neurons in the development of the 
paralemniscal pathway in the barrel cortex.

Liu J(1)
 Liu B(2), Zhang X(3), Yu B(4), Guan W(5), Wang K(6), Yang Y(7), Gong 
Y(8), Wu X(9), Yanagawa Y(10), Wu S(11), Zhao C(12)(13).
Author information:
(1)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
PR China.
liujunhua1975@hotmail.com.
(2)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
PR China.
myqj2006@126.com.
(3)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
PR China.
jiaoxiake08@163.com.
(4)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
PR China.
abcyu0517@gmail.com.
(5)Institute of Neurobiology, Institutes of Brain Science and State Key 
Laboratory of Medical Neurobiology, Fudan University, Shanghai, 200032, PR 
China.
guanwuqiang@gmail.com.
(6)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
PR China.
wangkunwj@163.com.
(7)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
PR China.
ate5455@163.com.
(8)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
PR China.
gongyifan1987@gmail.com.
(9)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
PR China.
wuxiaojing0204@hotmail.com.
(10)Department of Genetic and Behavioral Neuroscience, Gunma University Graduate 
School of Medicine, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, 371-8511, Japan.
yochio@gunma-u.ac.jp.
(11)Department of Anatomy, Histology and Embryology, K.K.
Leung Brain Research 
Centre, School of Basic Medicine, Fourth Military Medical University, Xi'an, 
710032, PR China.
devneuro@fmmu.edu.cn.
(12)Key Laboratory of Developmental Genes and Human Diseases, MOE, Department of 
Anatomy and Neuroscience, Medical School, Southeast University, Nanjing, 210009, 
PR China.
zhaocj@seu.edu.cn.
(13)Center of Depression, Beijing Institute for Brain Disorders, Beijing, 
100069, PR China.
zhaocj@seu.edu.cn.
BACKGROUND: The rodent barrel cortex has been established as an ideal model for 
studying the development and plasticity of a neuronal circuit.
The barrel cortex 
consists of barrel and septa columns, which receive various input signals 
through distinct pathways.
The lemniscal pathway transmits whisker-specific 
signals to homologous barrel columns, and the paralemniscal pathway transmits 
multi-whisker signals to both barrel and septa columns.
The integration of 
information from both lemniscal and paralemniscal pathways in the barrel cortex 
is critical for precise object recognition.
As the main target of the posterior 
medial nucleus (POm) in the paralemniscal pathway, layer 5a (L5a) pyramidal 
neurons are involved in both barrel and septa circuits and are considered an 
important site of information integration.
However, information on L5a neurons 
is very limited.
This study aims to explore the cellular features of L5a neurons 
and to provide a morphological basis for studying their roles in the development 
of the paralemniscal pathway and in information integration.
RESULTS: 1.
We found that the calcium-binding protein calretinin (CR) is 
dynamically expressed in L5a excitatory pyramidal neurons of the barrel cortex, 
and L5a neurons form a unique serrated pattern similar to the distributions of 
their presynaptic POm axon terminals.
2.
Infraorbital nerve transection disrupts 
this unique alignment, indicating that it is input dependent.
3.
The formation 
of the L5a neuronal alignment develops synchronously with barrels, which 
suggests that the lemniscal and paralemniscal pathways may interact with each 
other to regulate pattern formation and refinement in the barrel cortex.
4.
CR 
is specifically expressed in the paralemniscal pathway, and CR deletion disrupts 
the unique L5a neuronal pattern, which indicates that CR may be required for the 
development of the paralemniscal pathway.
CONCLUSIONS: Our results demonstrate that L5a neurons form a unique, 
input-dependent serrated alignment during the development of cortical barrels 
and that CR may play an important role in the development of the paralemniscal 
pathway.
Our data provide a morphological basis for studying the role of L5a 
pyramidal neurons in information integration within the lemniscal and 
paralemniscal pathways.
DOI: 10.1186/s13041-014-0084-8
PMCID: PMC4246560
PMID: 25404384 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Medical and surgical management of gastric obstruction from a hairball in the rabbit. 1. J Am Vet Med Assoc. 1983 Dec 1;183(11):1176-8.

Medical and surgical management of gastric obstruction from a hairball in the 
rabbit.

Gillett NA
 Brooks DL, Tillman PC.
Gastric hairballs in a colony of mature laboratory rabbits were associated with 
chronic, partial, or complete gastric obstruction and inanition.
Clinical signs 
included anorexia, decreased fecal output, weight loss, and depression.
The 
differentiation of anorexia induced by hairballs, stress, and other causes 
presented a diagnostic dilemma.
Radiographs could not be relied upon to 
differentiate gastric hairballs from normal gastric contents.
Combined medical 
and surgical management optimized successful recovery.
Supportive therapy was 
given 12 to 24 hours before surgical removal of the hairball and was continued 
postoperatively for 72 hours.
PMID: 6643229 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Modulation of Fcτ receptor expression a function in mouse peritoneal macrophages by ammonium metavanadate 1. Int J Immunopharmacol. 1991;13(8):1167-76. doi: 10.1016/0192-0561(91)90168-7.

Modulation of Fc tau receptor expression and function in mouse peritoneal 
macrophages by ammonium metavanadate.

Vaddi K(1)
 Wei CI.
Author information:
(1)Food Science and Human Nutrition Department, University of Florida, 
Gainesville 32611-0163.
Resident peritoneal macrophages (PEM) harvested from female B6C3F1 mice given an 
intraperitoneal injection of ammonium metavanadate (2.5 or 10 mg V/kg), an 
equivalent amount of ammonium in the form of ammonium chloride, or sodium 
phosphate buffer (0.1 M, pH 7.2) every third day for 6 weeks, were subjected to 
flow cytometric analysis of Fc tau 2a and Fc tau 2b receptor expression, and 
photometric microassay to measure receptor mediated binding and phagocytosis of 
sheep red blood cells (SRBC).
The NH4Cl and 10V groups showed 21.7 and 17.2% 
lower mean fluorescence channel (MFC) values and 7.1 and 5.9% lower values in 
percentage fluorescence-positive cells than the phosphate buffer control with 
respect to Fc tau 2a expression.
For Fc tau 2b expression, the 10V group showed 
significantly (P less than 0.05) lower MFC (31.2%) and percentage 
fluorescence-positive cells (15.7%) than the phosphate buffer control.
Though 
the four groups did not show a significant difference in Fc tau 2a mediated 
binding and phagocytosis of SRBC, the 10V group showed a significantly lower Fc 
tau 2b mediated binding and phagocytosis.
The results indicate that the 
reduction in Fc tau 2b expression and function could contribute toward the 
previously observed depression in phagocytosis, NADPH-oxidase and superoxide 
generation in peritoneal macrophages obtained from vanadate-treated animals.
DOI: 10.1016/0192-0561(91)90168-7
PMID: 1667652 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Inhibition of gastric secretion by anti-gastrinic and H2-blocking agents. 1. Scand J Gastroenterol Suppl. 1976;42:113-8.

Inhibition of gastric secretion by anti-gastrinic and H2-blocking agents.

Rovati AL.

PMID: 796963 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of somatostatin-25 and urotensin II on lipid and carbohydrate metabolism of coho salmon
 Oncorhynchus kisutch 1.
Gen Comp Endocrinol.
1987 Jun;66(3):405-14. doi: 10.1016/0016-6480(87)90251-6.
Effects of somatostatin-25 and urotensin II on lipid and carbohydrate metabolism 
of coho salmon, Oncorhynchus kisutch.
Sheridan MA, Plisetskaya EM, Bern HA, Gorbman A.

Salmon (Oncorhynchus kisutch) somatostatin (sSS; 4 or 8 ng/g body wt) or 
synthetic Gillichthys urotensin II (UII; 2 or 4 ng/g body wt) were injected 
intraperitoneally into juvenile freshwater coho salmon.
Both sSS and UII caused 
a dose-dependent increase in plasma free fatty acids (FFA) which diminished with 
time.
sSS induced an initial (1 hr) transient hyperglycemia.
By contrast, UII 
tended to induce hypoglycemia, this effect being significant 5 hr after 
injection of the higher dose.
Both sSS and UII depressed plasma insulin titers 1 
hr after injection.
By 3 hr, the sSS-associated insulin depression was no longer 
observed.
UII treatment induced a hyperinsulinemia which was present 3 and 5 hr 
after peptide administration.
Although no decreases in liver total lipid 
concentration or in mesenteric fat total tissue mass were observed, lipolytic 
enzyme activity within each depot was significantly enhanced by both peptides.
Neither sSS nor UII altered 3H2O incorporation into fatty acids or neutral 
lipids.
However, enhanced lipogenesis, particularly by UII, was indicated by 
increased NADPH production resulting from glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase 
activity.
Both sSS and UII enhanced glucose mobilization, as indicated by 
decreased liver glycogen content and increased liver glucose-6-phosphatase 
activity.
UII, but not sSS, stimulated glycogen synthetase activity.
These 
results suggest that both sSS and UII stimulate hyperlipidemia by enhancing 
depot lipase activity and that although both factors are potentially 
gluconeogenetic, sSS seems to be glycogenolytic and hyperglycemic, whereas UII 
may channel glucose to FFA synthesis.
DOI: 10.1016/0016-6480(87)90251-6
PMID: 2886397 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Adrenergic and Serotoninergic Mechanisms in Gastric Secretion in Rats <jats:p><jats:bold>Abstract: </jats:bold> The influence of adrenergic and serotoninergic mechanisms on gastric secretion was investigated using fistula‐ and pylorus‐ligated rats. Secretion was increased by the tyrosine hydroxylase inhibitor α‐methyltyrosine. This effect could be reversed by L‐DOPA. 6‐hydroxydopamine also increased gastric output. The tryptophane hydroxylase inhibitor <jats:italic>p</jats:italic>‐chlorophenylalanine reduced gastric output and abolished the increase in gastric secretion induced by α‐methyltyrosine.</jats:p><jats:p>The antisecretory effect of serotonin was found to be antagonized by α‐methyltyrosine. Pre‐treatment with 6‐hydroxydopamine also diminished the anti‐secretory effect of serotonin.</jats:p><jats:p>The results indicate the possibility of the existence of an inhibiting peripheral adrenergic tonus in the regulation of gastric secretion in rats. Furthermore it is suggested
 that the anti‐secretory effect of large doses of serotonin may be due to displacement of noradrenaline in catecholamine neurones.
Finally the question is raised whether a balance between serotoninergic and adrenergic mechanisms in the regulation of gastric secretion may exist in rats.</jats:p>
Protein kinase C modulates exogenous acetylcholine current in <i>Xenopus</i> oocytes <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The modulation of acetylcholine‐activated current (I<jats:sub>ACh</jats:sub>) by protein kinase C (PKC) was studied in Xenopus laevis oocytes microinjected with either mRNA extracted from C2C12 myotubes (C2C12 mRNA) or RNAs encoding murine αβγδ subunits of the nicotinic ACh receptor (nAChR). Voltage‐clamped oocytes were treated for 90 sec with 12‐0‐tetradecanoylphorbol‐13‐acetate (TPA
 300 nM), a potent PKC activator.
Transient increase in the amplitude and acceleration in the decay of I<jats:sub>ACh</jats:sub> were invariably observed within minutes of TPA application, and were independent of extracellular Ca<jats:sup>2+</jats:sup> concentration.
Both parameters recovered to control within 20–30 min; then a slight depression of I<jats:sub>ACh</jats:sub> developed.
By this time, an initial PKC down regulation was observed.
At the peak of TPA‐induced potentiation, dose‐response relations suggested an increased binding affinity of nAChR for the neurotransmitter.
4a‐phorbol 12,13‐didecanoate (300 nM), a biologically inactive analogue of TPA, did not affect I<jats:sub>ACh</jats:sub>, while staurosporine (5–10 μM), a potent inhibitor of PKC activity, suppressed the action of TPA on I<jats:sub>ACh</jats:sub>.
In oocytes co‐injected with C2C12 mRNA and with rat brain mRNA, I<jats:sub>ACh</jats:sub> was potentiated by 5‐hydroxytryptamine (10 μM), whose receptors are coupled to phosphoinositide hydrolysis.
The nAChR‐channel activity in cell‐attached patches increased when TPA was applied to the oocytes.
In 50% of the oocytes examined, a sustained depression of the single channel activity followed.
We conclude that in Xenopus oocytes an endogenous PKC system regulates the function of embryonic‐type muscle nAChRs.
© 1995 Wiley‐Liss, Inc.</jats:p>
Stereospecific synthesis and bio-activity of novel β3-adrenoceptor agonists and inverse agonists 1. Bioorg Med Chem. 2008 Mar 1;16(5):2473-88. doi: 10.1016/j.bmc.2007.11.060.
Epub  2007 Nov 28.

Stereospecific synthesis and bio-activity of novel beta(3)-adrenoceptor agonists 
and inverse agonists.

Perrone MG(1)
 Santandrea E, Bleve L, Vitale P, Colabufo NA, Jockers R, Milazzo 
FM, Sciarroni AF, Scilimati A.
Author information:
(1)Dipartimento Farmaco-Chimico, Università di Bari, Via E.Orabona 4, 70125 
Bari, Italy.
Since it is widely distributed into the body, beta(3)-adrenoceptor is becoming 
an attractive target for the treatment of several pathologies such as obesity, 
type 2 diabetes, metabolic syndrome, cachexia, overactive bladder, 
ulcero-inflammatory disorder of the gut, preterm labour, anxiety and depressive 
disorders, and heart failure.
New compounds belonging to the class of 
arylethanolamines bearing one or two stereogenic centres were prepared in good 
yields as racemates and optically active forms.
They were, then, evaluated for 
their intrinsic activity towards beta(3)-adrenoceptor and their affinity for 
beta(1)- and beta(2)-adrenergic receptors.
Stereochemical features were found to 
play a crucial role in determining the behaviour of such compounds.
In 
particular, alpha-racemic, (alphaR)- and 
(alphaS)-2-{4-[2-(2-hydroxy-2-phenylethylamino)ethyl]phenoxy}-2- methylpropanoic 
acid, (alpha-rac, beta-rac)-, (alphaR, betaS)- and (alphaR, betaR)- 
2-{4-[2-(2-hydroxy-2-phenylethylamino)ethyl]phenoxy}propanoic acid were found to 
be endowed with beta(3)-adrenoceptor agonistic activity.
Whereas, (alphaS, 
betaS)- and (alphaS, 
betaR)-2-{4-[2-(2-hydroxy-2-phenylethylamino)ethyl]phenoxy}propanoic acid 
behaved as beta(3)-adrenoceptor inverse agonists.
Such compounds showed no 
affinity for beta(1)- and beta(2)-adrenergic receptor, respectively.
Thus, 
resulting highly selective beta(3)-adrenoceptor ligands.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bmc.2007.11.060
PMID: 18083578 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Role of residual calcium in synaptic depression and posttetanic potentiation: Fast and slow calcium signaling in nerve terminals 1. Neuron. 1991 Dec;7(6):915-26. doi: 10.1016/0896-6273(91)90337-y.

Role of residual calcium in synaptic depression and posttetanic potentiation: 
fast and slow calcium signaling in nerve terminals.

Swandulla D(1)
 Hans M, Zipser K, Augustine GJ.
Author information:
(1)Max-Planck-Institut für Biophysikalische Chemie, Am Fassberg, Göttingen, 
Germany.
Trains of action potentials evoked rises in presynaptic Ca2+ concentration 
([Ca2+]i) at the squid giant synapse.
These increases in [Ca2+]i were spatially 
nonuniform during the trains, but rapidly equilibrated after the trains and 
slowly declined over hundreds of seconds.
The trains also elicited synaptic 
depression and augmentation, both of which developed during stimulation and 
declined within a few seconds afterward.
Microinjection of the Ca2+ buffer EGTA 
into presynaptic terminals had no effect on transmitter release or synaptic 
depression.
However, EGTA injection effectively blocked both the persistent Ca2+ 
signals and augmentation.
These results suggest that transmitter release is 
triggered by a large, brief, and sharply localized rise in [Ca2+]i, while 
augmentation is produced by a smaller, slower, and more diffuse rise in [Ca2+]i.

DOI: 10.1016/0896-6273(91)90337-y
PMID: 1662519 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Barbiturates depress vagal motor pathway to ferret trachea at ganglia <jats:p> To determine which site in the vagal motor pathway to airway smooth muscle is most sensitive to depression by barbiturates
 we recorded isometric muscle tension in vitro and stimulated the vagal motor pathway at four different sites before and after exposure to barbiturates.
In isolated tracheal rings from ferrets, we stimulated muscarinic receptors in the neuromuscular junction by exogenous acetylcholine, postganglionic nerve fibers by electrical fluid stimulation, and the postsynaptic membrane in ganglia by 1,1-dimethyl-4-phenylpiperazinium iodide (DMPP).
We also developed a tracheal nerve-muscle preparation to stimulate preganglionic fibers in the vagus nerve electrically.
Activation of ganglia by DMPP or by vagus nerve stimulation was depressed by barbiturates at 10-fold lower concentrations than those depressing the activation of postganglionic nerves or the neuromuscular junction.
These findings suggest that the postsynaptic membrane in parasympathetic ganglia is the site in the vagal motor pathway most sensitive to depression by barbiturates.
</jats:p>
RELAXANT EFFECT OF ADENOSINE TRIPHOSPHATE AND ITS RELATED NUCLEOTIDES ON THE GUINEA-PIG TAENIA COLT 1. Nihon Heikatsukin Gakkai Zasshi. 1971 Dec;7(4):207-12. doi: 
10.1540/jsmr1965.7.207.

Relaxant effect of adenosine triphosphate and its related nucleotides on the 
guinea-pig taenia coli.

Suzuki T
 Fukushi Y, Rikimaru A.

DOI: 10.1540/jsmr1965.7.207
PMID: 5170388 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Morphological Studies of the Foramen caecum linguae of the Human and Guinea Pig Tongue <jats:p>A three-dimensional study of the development of the thyroid gland in human and guinea pig embryos was made together with a histological investigation of the foramen caecum of the human adult tongue. In the human embryo
 an epithelial depression was not seen between the first and second branchial arches except a shallow sulcus.
Ciliated cells were observed on the dorsal surface of the tongue in all embryos which exceeded 18 mm in crown-rump length.
The presence of a foramen caecum was observed in 18 (51%) cadavers from 35 human adults.
Several circumvallate papillae were found in a 10-mm-deep foramen caecum on the side adjacent to the anterior two thirds of the tongue.
In all specimens serous glands open into the foramen caecum.</jats:p>
Factors Affecting the Hypocalcaemic Response to Protamine 1. Acta Vet Scand. 1975;16(1):51-62. doi: 10.1186/BF03546695.

Factors affecting the hypocalcaemic response to protamine.

Persson J
 Luthman J.
The hypocalcaemic response to protamine, as a measure of bone resorption rate, 
was studied in cattle and sheep.
Three groups of calves were studied (1–3 days, 
2–3 weeks and 4 months old).
The oldest calves showed the greatest response, 
indicating a more rapid skeletal turnover in these animals, probably related to 
a higher growing rate.
A group of cows was tested at 2 occasions, near 
parturition and 2–3 weeks after parturition.
The decrease in plasma calcium was 
small near parturition, while a profound drop was obtained 2–3 weeks post 
partum, which supports earlier findings that bone resorption is more or less 
blocked in parturient cows.
Young pregnant ewes showed the same degree of 
hypocalcaemia as adult pregnant ewes but the recovery was more rapid in the 
young animals.
Young rams were given protamine before and after 
diethylstilboestrol treatment.
No differences in calcium response were obtained.
Varying plasma phosphate responses were obtained.
A pronounced 
hyperphosphataemia was found in the adult pregnant ewes.
Diethylstilboestrol 
caused hypermagnesaemia in the rams.
Det hypokalcemiska svaret av protamin, som ett mått på benresorptionen, 
studerades hos nötkreatur och får.
Tre grupper av kalvar undersöktes (1–3 dagar, 
2–3 veckor samt 4 månader gamla).
De äldsta kalvarna visade den kraftigaste 
kalciumsänkningen, vilket tolkades som en snabbare „turnover” i dessa djurs 
skelett, troligen relaterad till en högre tillväxttakt.
En grupp av kor testades 
vid två tillfällen, nära förlossningen samt 2–3 veckor efter förlossningen.
Kalciumsänkningen var liten vid första tillfället, medan en uttalad hypokalcemi 
erhölls vid andra infusionen.
Resultaten stöder tidigare uppgifter om att 
benresorptionen är mer eller mindre blockerad hos kor vid tiden för förlossning.
Unga dräktiga tackor uppvisade samma grad av hypokalcemi som gamla dräktiga 
tackor.
Hos de unga djuren skedde emellertid normaliseringen av plasmakalcium 
snabbare.
Unga baggar erhöll injektioner med protamin före och efter behandling 
med dietylstilboestrol.
Kalciumsvaret var detsamma vid båda tillfällena.
Varierande svar i halten av oorganiskt fosfor erhölls.
De gamla dräktiga 
tackorna uppvisade en påtaglig hyperfosfatemi.
Behandling med dietylstilboestrol 
medförde hypermagnesemi hos ungbaggarna.
DOI: 10.1186/BF03546695
PMCID: PMC8396091
PMID: 1136909 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A role for 2-arachidonoylglycerol and endocannabinoid signaling in the locomotor response to novelty induced by olfactory bulbectomy 1. Pharmacol Res. 2010 May;61(5):419-29. doi: 10.1016/j.phrs.2009.12.013. Epub
2010  Jan 5.

A role for 2-arachidonoylglycerol and endocannabinoid signaling in the locomotor 
response to novelty induced by olfactory bulbectomy.

Eisenstein SA(1)
 Clapper JR, Holmes PV, Piomelli D, Hohmann AG.
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience and Behavior Program, Department of Psychology, University of 
Georgia, Athens, GA 30602-3013, USA.
Bilateral olfactory bulbectomy (OBX) in rodents produces behavioral and 
neurochemical changes associated clinically with depression and schizophrenia.
Most notably, OBX induces hyperlocomotion in response to the stress of exposure 
to a novel environment.
We examined the role of the endocannabinoid system in 
regulating this locomotor response in OBX and sham-operated rats.
In our study, 
OBX-induced hyperactivity was restricted to the first 3 min of the open field 
test, demonstrating the presence of novelty (0-3 min) and habituation (3-30 min) 
phases of the open field locomotor response.
Levels of the endocannabinoids 
2-arachidonoylglycerol (2-AG) and anandamide were decreased in the ventral 
striatum, a brain region deafferented by OBX, whereas cannabinoid receptor 
densities were unaltered.
In sham-operated rats, 2-AG levels in the ventral 
striatum were negatively correlated with distance traveled during the novelty 
phase.
Thus, low levels of 2-AG are reflected in a hyperactive open field 
response.
This correlation was not observed in OBX rats.
Conversely, 2-AG levels 
in endocannabinoid-compromised OBX rats correlated with distance traveled during 
the habituation phase.
In OBX rats, pharmacological blockade of cannabinoid 
CB(1) receptors with either AM251 (1 mg kg(-1) i.p.)
or rimonabant (1 mg kg(-1) 
i.p.)
increased distance traveled during the habituation phase.
Thus, blockade 
of endocannabinoid signaling impairs habituation of the hyperlocomotor response 
in OBX, but not sham-operated, rats.
By contrast, in sham-operated rats, effects 
of CB(1) antagonism were restricted to the novelty phase.
These findings suggest 
that dysregulation in the endocannabinoid system, and 2-AG in particular, is 
implicated in the hyperactive locomotor response induced by OBX.
Our studies 
suggest that drugs that enhance 2-AG signaling, such as 2-AG degradation 
inhibitors, might be useful in human brain disorders modeled by OBX.
(c) 2010.
Published by Elsevier Ltd.

DOI: 10.1016/j.phrs.2009.12.013
PMCID: PMC2867105
PMID: 20044005 [Indexed for MEDLINE]

Conflict of interest statement: Disclosure/Conflict of Interest The authors 
declare that there is no conflict of interest.
Transthyretin knockouts are a new mouse model for increased neuropeptide Y 1. FASEB J. 2006 Jan;20(1):166-8. doi: 10.1096/fj.05-4106fje. Epub 2005 Nov 1.

Transthyretin knockouts are a new mouse model for increased neuropeptide Y.

Nunes AF(1)
 Saraiva MJ, Sousa MM.
Author information:
(1)Molecular Neurobiology, Instituto de Biologia Molecular e Celular-IBMC, 
Porto, Portugal.
Transthyretin (TTR) has access to the brain and nerve through the blood and 
cerebrospinal fluid.
To investigate TTR function in nervous system homeostasis, 
differential gene expression in wild-type (WT) and TTR knockout (KO) mice was 
assessed.
Peptidylglycine alpha-amidating monooxygenase (PAM), the rate-limiting 
enzyme in neuropeptide maturation, is overexpressed in the peripheral (PNS) and 
central nervous system (CNS) of TTR KOs that, consequently, display increased 
neuropeptide Y (NPY) levels.
NPY acts on energy homeostasis by increasing white 
adipose tissue lipoprotein lipase (LPL) and decreasing thermogenesis; 
accordingly, we show increased LPL expression and activity in white adipose 
tissue, PNS, and CNS as well as decreased body temperature in TTR KOs.
Associated to increased NPY levels, TTR KOs display increased carbohydrate 
consumption and preference.
In neuronal cells, absence of TTR is related to 
increased PAM activity, NPY levels and LPL expression, reinforcing that TTR is 
involved in neuropeptide maturation and that increased NPY correlates with LPL 
overexpression in the nervous system.
Furthermore, we provide molecular insights 
to the reduced depressive behavior of TTR KOs, as NPY is anti-depressant.
Our 
findings demonstrate that TTR KOs are a model for increased NPY and that TTR 
plays a role in nervous system physiology.
DOI: 10.1096/fj.05-4106fje
PMID: 16263939 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Rate of Activation and Electrophoretic Mobility of Unmodified and Partially Degraded Plasminogen Effects of 6-Aminohexanoic Acid and Related Compounds 1. Scand J Clin Lab Invest. 1974 Oct;34(2):167-76.

Rate of activation and electrophoretic mobility of unmodified and partially 
degraded plasminogen. Effects of 6-aminohexanoic acid and related compounds.

Thorsen S
 Müllertz S.

PMID: 4278395 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Progesterone Action: Regulation of Avidin Biosynthesis by Hen Oviduct<i>in Vivo</i>and<i>in Vitro</i> 1. Endocrinology. 1968 Jul;83(1):11-7. doi: 10.1210/endo-83-1-11.

Progesterone action: regulation of avidin biosynthesis by hen oviduct in vivo 
and in vitro.

Korenman SG
 O'Malley BW.
DOI: 10.1210/endo-83-1-11
PMID: 5659423 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Decreased basal despite enhanced agonist-stimulated effects of nitric oxide in 12-week-old stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rat 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1999 Aug 27;379(2-3):175-82. doi: 
10.1016/s0014-2999(99)00511-7.

Decreased basal despite enhanced agonist-stimulated effects of nitric oxide in 
12-week-old stroke-prone spontaneously hypertensive rat.

Dowell FJ(1)
 Martin W, Dominiczak AF, Hamilton CA.
Author information:
(1)Clinical Research Initiative, University of Glasgow, UK.
f.dowell@bio.gla.ac.uk

This study examined both basal and agonist-stimulated effects of nitric oxide in 
rings of thoracic aorta and carotid artery from 12-week-old stroke-prone 
spontaneously hypertensive rats (SHRSP) and compared them to those found in 
rings from normotensive Wistar Kyoto (WKY) controls.
Acetylcholine-induced 
endothelium-dependent relaxation was found to be five-fold more sensitive in 
both male and female SHRSP when compared with those from age- and sex-matched 
WKY rats.
In contrast, we found a reduction in the effects of basal nitric oxide 
in the SHRSP rat.
Specifically, the ability of basal nitric oxide to depress 
contractile responses to phenylephrine was found to be reduced in vessels from 
SHRSP when compared with those from WKY rats.
In addition, the 
endothelium-dependent depression of vasodilator responses to the nitric oxide 
donor, glyceryl trinitrate, was reduced in vessels from SHRSP when compared to 
those from WKY rats.
Thus, we have shown that the effects of basal nitric oxide 
are impaired in the SHRSP rat at an age when the effects of agonist-stimulated 
nitric oxide are actually enhanced.
This impairment may be related to the 
greater susceptibility of basal nitric oxide to destruction by superoxide anion 
which is known to be produced in excess in this model of hypertension.
DOI: 10.1016/s0014-2999(99)00511-7
PMID: 10497904 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A Postsynaptic Interaction between Dopamine D<sub>1</sub>and NMDA Receptors Promotes Presynaptic Inhibition in the Rat Nucleus Accumbens via Adenosine Release <jats:p>The mechanism underlying dopamine D<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>receptor-mediated attenuation of glutamatergic synaptic input to nucleus accumbens (NAcc) neurons was investigated in slices of rat forebrain
 using whole-cell patch-clamp recording.
The depression by dopamine of EPSCs evoked by single-shock cortical stimulation was stimulus-dependent.
Synaptic activation of NMDA-type glutamate receptors was critical for this effect, because dopamine-induced EPSC depressions were blocked by the competitive NMDA receptor antagonist<jats:sc>d</jats:sc>/<jats:sc>l</jats:sc>-2-amino-5-phosphonopentanoate (AP5).
Application of NMDA also depressed the EPSC, and both this effect and the dopamine depressions were blocked by the A<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>receptor antagonist 8-cyclopentyl-1,3-dipropylxanthine (DPCPX), implicating adenosine release in the EPSC depression.
A<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>receptor agonists also depressed EPSCs by a presynaptic action, causing increased paired-pulse facilitation, but this was insensitive to AP5.
Activation of D<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>receptors enhanced both postsynaptic inward currents evoked by NMDA application and the isolated NMDA receptor-mediated component of synaptic transmission.
The biochemical processes underlying the dopamine-induced EPSC depression did not involve either protein kinase A or the production of cAMP and its metabolites, because this effect was resistant to the protein kinase inhibitors H89 and H7 and the cAMP-specific phosphodiesterase inhibitor rolipram.
We conclude that activation of postsynaptic D<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>receptors enhances the synaptic activation of NMDA receptors in nucleus accumbens neurons, thereby promoting a transsynaptic feedback inhibition of glutamatergic synaptic transmission via release of adenosine.
Unusually for D<jats:sub>1</jats:sub>receptors, this phenomenon occurs independently of adenylyl cyclase stimulation.
This process may contribute to the locomotor stimulant action of dopaminergic agents in the NAcc.</jats:p>
Neuroprotective effect of chronic verapamil treatment on cognitive and noncognitive deficits in an experimental alzheimer's disease in rats 1. Int J Neurosci. 1997 Nov;92(1-2):79-93. doi: 10.3109/00207459708986392.

Neuroprotective effect of chronic verapamil treatment on cognitive and 
noncognitive deficits in an experimental Alzheimer's disease in rats.

Popović M(1)
 Caballero-Bleda M, Popović N, Bokonjić D, Dobrić S.

Author information:
(1)Departamento de Ciencias Morfologicas y Psicobiologia, Facultad de Medicina, 
Universidad de Murcia, Spain.
It is well known that disturbance of calcium homeostasis has a significant role 
in the development of neurodegenerative disorders, such as Alzheimer's disease 
(AD).
Our recent data suggest that acute treatment with the calcium antagonist 
verapamil can improve some behavioral deficits in an experimental model of AD.
Therefore, the present study was done to establish the effect of chronically 
administered verapamil on cognitive and noncognitive behavior of rats with 
bilateral electrolitical lesions of nucleus basalis manocellularis (NBM)--an 
animal model of AD.
The NBM lesions produce a deficit in performance of diverse 
behavior tests: active avoidance (AA), low level of fear (the open field test) 
as well as aggressive (the test of foot-shock induced aggression) and depressive 
(the learned helplessness test) behavior.
Verapamil (1.0, 2.5, 5.0 and 10.0 
mg/kg i.p.)
or saline solution (1 ml/kg i.p.)
were injected 24 hr after the 
lesion of NBM and then repeatedly administered during the next 8 days (twice a 
day).
Performance of the two-way active avoidance test, the open field test, the 
foot shock-induced aggression test and the learned helplessness test were done 
on day 4 after the last verapamil or saline treatment (day 13 after the lesion).
Verapamil in doses of 2.5 and 5.0 mg/kg significantly ameliorated the deficit in 
the performance of AA, the open field behavior, and the depression, but not the 
aggressive behavior.
The obtained beneficial effect of chronic administered 
verapamil suggests that the regulation of calcium homeostasis during the early 
period after NBM lesions might be a reasonable way to prevent the behavioral 
deficits in an experimental model of AD.
DOI: 10.3109/00207459708986392
PMID: 9522258 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The kinetics of inhibition of hepatic drug metabolism by prostaglandins in rabbits. 1. Res Commun Chem Pathol Pharmacol. 1980 Sep;29(3):561-71.

The kinetics of inhibition of hepatic drug metabolism by prostaglandins in 
rabbits.

Weiner M.

The in vitro effects of prostaglandin A1 and prostaglandin E1 on the hepatic 
microsomal metabolism of type I (aminopyrine) and type II 
(p-chloro-N-methylaniline and aniline) drug substrates in rabbits were 
investigated. Both prostaglandins competitively inhibited aminopyrine 
N-demethylation to the same extent with a 500 microM prostaglandin concentration 
decreasing metabolism by approximately 50 percent. Prostaglandin A1 and 
prostaglandin F1 decreased p-chloro-N-methylaniline biotransformation
 and 
prostaglandin E1 depressed aniline metabolims, via mixed-inhibition kinetics.
The degree of inhibition was greatest with aniline as substrate.
Aniline (0.125 
mM) metabolism was inhibitied 49 percent and 71 percent by 100 microM and 500 
microM prostaglandin E1, respectively.
PMID: 6448462 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Hemodynamic Responses to Doxapram in Normovolemic and Hypovolemic Dogs 1. Anesth Analg. 1971 Sep-Oct;50(5):705-10. doi:
10.1213/00000539-197150050-00003.

Hemodynamic responses to doxapram in normovolemic and hypovolemic dogs.

Kim SI
 Winnie AP, Collins VJ, Shoemaker WC.
DOI: 10.1213/00000539-197150050-00003
PMID: 4398848 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Coeruleotrigeminal suppression of nociceptive sensorimotor function during inflammation in the craniofacial region of the rat 1. Brain Res Bull. 2003 Jun 30;61(1):73-80. doi: 10.1016/s0361-9230(03)00063-7.

Coeruleotrigeminal suppression of nociceptive sensorimotor function during 
inflammation in the craniofacial region of the rat.

Matsutani K(1)
 Tsuruoka M, Shinya A, Furuya R, Kawawa T, Inoue T.

Author information:
(1)Department of Fixed Prosthodontics, Showa University School of Dentistry, 
1-5-8 Hatanodai, Shinagawa-ku, Tokyo 142-8555, Japan.
Descending action from the locus coeruleus (LC) on the trigeminal sensorimotor 
function was evaluated in a rat model of oral-facial inflammation.
For the 
induction of oral-facial inflammation, mustard oil (20% solution in 20microl 
mineral oil) was injected into the region of the temporomandibular joint (TMJ).
One week before testing, rats received bilateral lesions of the LC using a 
cathodal current.
The electromyogram (EMG) threshold, which is the threshold 
intensity for the onset of EMG activity of the masseter muscle evoked by 
pressure on the TMJ region, was used in the present study as an indicator of the 
trigeminal sensorimotor function.
Following mustard oil injection, in the 
LC-lesioned rats, EMG thresholds significantly decreased at 30min, which lasted 
up to 240min.
In contrast, EMG thresholds in the LC-intact rats returned to the 
level before injection after 180min.
Systemic naloxone (1.3mg/kg, i.v.)
produced 
a further decrease of EMG thresholds in both the LC-intact and LC-lesioned rats.
Under the existence of naloxone, EMG thresholds in the LC-lesioned rats were 
significantly lower than those of the LC-intact rats.
These results suggest that 
oral-facial inflammation activates the coeruleotrigeminal modulating system and 
that an action of this system is independent of the opioid depressive mechanism.
DOI: 10.1016/s0361-9230(03)00063-7
PMID: 12788209 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
A natural model of behavioral depression in postpartum adult female cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis). 1. Dongwuxue Yanjiu. 2014 May;35(3):174-81. doi: 
10.11813/j.issn.0254-5853.2014.3.174.

A natural model of behavioral depression in postpartum adult female cynomolgus 
monkeys (Macaca fascicularis).

Chu XX(1)
 Dominic Rizak J(2), Yang SC(3), Wang JH(4), Ma YY(5), Hu XT(6).
Author information:
(1)Laboratory of Primate Neuroscience Research and Key Laboratory of Animal 
Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan 
Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming 650223, China;University of the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(2)Laboratory of Primate Neuroscience Research and Key Laboratory of Animal 
Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan 
Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming 650223, China; University of the 
Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100049, China.
(3)Laboratory of Primate Neuroscience Research and Key Laboratory of Animal 
Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan 
Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming 650223, China.
(4)Laboratory of Primate Neuroscience Research and Key Laboratory of Animal 
Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan 
Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming 650223, China; Kunming Primate 
Research Center, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming 650223, China.
(5)Laboratory of Primate Neuroscience Research and Key Laboratory of Animal 
Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan 
Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming 650223, China; Kunming Primate 
Research Center, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming 650223, China.
yuanma0716@vip.sina.com.
(6)Laboratory of Primate Neuroscience Research and Key Laboratory of Animal 
Models and Human Disease Mechanisms of the Chinese Academy of Sciences & Yunnan 
Province, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Kunming 650223, China; Kunming Primate 
Research Center, Kunming Institute of Zoology, Chinese Academy of Sciences, 
Kunming 650223, China.
xthu@mail.kiz.ac.cn.
Postpartum depression (PPD) is a modified form of major depressive disorders 
(MDD) that can exert profound negative effects on both mothers and infants than 
MDD.
Within the postpartum period, both mothers and infants are susceptible; but 
because PPD typically occurs for short durations and has moderate symptoms, 
there exists challenges in exploring and addressing the underlying cause of the 
depression.
This fact highlights the need for relevant animal models.
In the 
present study, postpartum adult female cynomolgus monkeys (Macaca fascicularis) 
living in breeding groups were observed for typical depressive behavior.
The 
huddle posture behavior was utilized as an indicator of behavioral depression 
postpartum (BDP) as it has been established as the core depressive-like behavior 
in primates.
Monkeys were divided into two groups: A BDP group (n=6), which were 
found to spend more time huddling over the first two weeks postpartum than other 
individuals that formed a non-depression control group (n=4).
The two groups 
were then further analyzed for locomotive activity, stressful events, hair 
cortisol levels and for maternal interactive behaviors.
No differences were 
found between the BDP and control groups in locomotive activity, in the 
frequencies of stressful events experienced and in hair cortisol levels.
These 
findings suggested that the postpartum depression witnessed in the monkeys was 
not related to external factors other than puerperium period.
Interestingly, the 
BDP monkeys displayed an abnormal maternal relationship consisting of increased 
infant grooming.
Taken together, these findings suggest that the adult female 
cynomolgus monkeys provide a natural model of behavioral postpartum depression 
that holds a number of advantages over commonly used rodent systems in PPD 
modeling.
The cynomolgus monkeys have a highly-organized social hierarchy and 
reproductive characteristics without seasonal restriction-similar to humans-as 
well as much greater homology to humans than rodents.
As such, this model may 
provide a greater translational efficiency and research platform for 
systematically investigating the etiology, treatment, prevention of PPD.
DOI: 10.11813/j.issn.0254-5853.2014.3.174
PMCID: PMC5055539
PMID: 24866487 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The mechanism of late deceleration of the heart rate and its relationship to oxygenation in normoxemic and chronically hypoxemic fetal lambs 1. Am J Obstet Gynecol. 1982 Jan 1;142(1):66-73. doi: 
10.1016/s0002-9378(16)32286-4.

The mechanism of late deceleration of the heart rate and its relationship to 
oxygenation in normoxemic and chronically hypoxemic fetal lambs.

Itskovitz J
 Goetzman BW, Rudolph AM.
The responses of fetal heart rate and blood pressure to a transient reduction in 
uterine blood flow were studied in normoxemic and chronically hypoxemic lambs.
In normoxemic fetuses, a reduction in uterine blood flow, if prolonged 
sufficiently, produced reflex bradycardia mediated through chemoreceptors and 
was associated with a decrease in carotid arterial PO2 to below 20 torr.
The 
bradycardia was associated with a marked decrease in left ventricular output as 
measured by electromagnetic flowmeter; both were abolished by atropine.
In 
chronically hypoxemic fetuses, a reduction in uterine blood flow produced a 
delayed deceleration of the heart rate which consisted of three components: 
reflex bradycardia due to chemoreceptor stimulation; baroreceptor-mediated 
reflex bradycardia which involved the slow and late recovery of the heart rate; 
and nonreflex bradycardia which was probably secondary to hypoxic myocardial 
depression.
Quantitative analysis revealed a relationship between the components 
of delayed deceleration and the status of fetal oxygenation prior to the 
reduction in uterine blood flow.
The lower the carotid arterial PO2, the shorter 
was the delay in the onset of bradycardia, the greater the decrease in heart 
rate, and the more prolonged the duration of bradycardia.
The conclusion is that 
the response of fetal heart rate to a transient reduction in uterine blood flow 
is related to the duration of the reduction and to the status of fetal 
oxygenation prior to the decrease in uterine blood flow.
DOI: 10.1016/s0002-9378(16)32286-4
PMID: 7055173 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[The nutritional status change the effectiveness of a dietary supplement of lactic bacteria on the emerging of respiratory tract diseases in children]. 1. Arch Latinoam Nutr. 2002 Mar;52(1):29-34.

[The nutritional status change the effectiveness of a dietary supplement of 
lactic bacteria on the emerging of respiratory tract diseases in children].

[Article in Spanish]

Río ME(1)
 Zago Beatriz L, Garcia H, Winter L.

Author information:
(1)Cátedra de Nutrición, Facultad de Farmacia y Bioquímica, Universidad de 
Buenos Aires, Departamento de Pediatría, Hospital Prof. Dr. Alejandro Posadas, 
Provincia de Buenos Aires.
One hundred children 6 to 24 month old, normal or undernourished according to 
weight for height index, received during three months--autumn to winter--a 
dietary supplement of live Lactobacillus acidophilus and Lactobacillus Casei, 
10(7)-10(8)/ml in fermented milk (LB) or an equivalent amount of fluid milk (L) 
as control.
Children's follow-up was performed as outpatients in the Hospital 
Posadas (Great Buenos Aires).
Episodes of respiratory tract infections were 
recorded and classified according to severity as: Pneumonia (N); Bronchitis (B), 
Recurrent Obstructive Bronchitis (BOR) and upper respiratory tract infections 
(CVAS).
58% of children fitted the study protocol, 22 in the LB and 36 in the L 
group; 21 were undernourished and 37 presented normal weight/height.
No deaths 
were recorded.
Total episodes were 103: 34 in LB and 69 in L, that means a 
frequency of 1.55 and 1.92 episodes/children respectively.
In LB a maximum of 3 
episodes/children was recorded, meanwhile the number reached 7 in L (p = 
0.0373).
Severity was higher in L than LB: 0.06 vs. 0 for N; 0.69 vs. 0.45 for B 
+ BOR and 1.17 vs. 1.09 for CVAS.
In the control group frequency of severe 
pathologies was about twice in undernourished than in normal: 0.08 vs. 0.04 for 
N; 1.08 vs. 0.50 for B + BOR; no difference was found for CVAS.
Live 
lactobacillus supplement suppressed pneumonia and decreased bronchitis in 
undernourished as well as in normal.
In this study undernutrition not only 
increased the chance of suffering severe acute respiratory tract infections but 
also impaired the effectiveness of the supplement to decrease severity.
The 
effect is explained on the basis of the immunocompetence depression linked to an 
inadequate nutritional status.
PMID: 12214543 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effect of lidocaine and quinidine on steady-state characteristics and recovery kinetics of (dV/dt)max in guinea pig ventricular myocardium. <jats:p>We studied the effects of quinidine and lidocaine on the steady-state relationship between membrane potential and the maximum rate of rise of the action potential
 (dV/dt)max, and on the recovery kinetics of (dV/dt)max in guinea pig papillary muscles.
The steady-state relationships were determined in fibers stimulated at 0.2/sec and depolarized with KCl.
Recovery kinetics were determined at various resting membrane potentials by assessing (dV/dt)max in progressively earlier premature action potentials.
Lidocaine caused a dose-dependent decrease in (dV/dt)max, shifted the curve defining the steady-state relationship along the voltage axis in the direction of more negative potentials, and slowed the recovery kinetics of (dV/dt)max.
Quinidine caused a dose-dependent decrease in (dV/dt)max but did not alter the shape of the curves defining either the steady-state relationship or the recovery kinetics of (dV/dt)max.
Both drugs depressed membrane responsiveness as determined in premature action potentials originating from incompletely repolarized fibers.
Our study indicates that the mechanisms whereby quinidine and lidocaine influence (dV/dt)max are different.
It is possible that this difference may underlie some of the differences in the clinical effects of these two drugs.</jats:p>
Comparison of the effects of ethanol and 4-methylpyrazole on the pharmacokinetics and toxicity of ethylene glycol in the dog 1. Toxicol Lett. 1987 Feb;35(2-3):307-14. doi: 10.1016/0378-4274(87)90220-7.

Comparison of the effects of ethanol and 4-methylpyrazole on the 
pharmacokinetics and toxicity of ethylene glycol in the dog.

Grauer GF
 Thrall MA, Henre BA, Hjelle JJ.
The purpose of this investigation was to compare the effects of ethanol and 
4-methylpyrazole (4MP) on the toxicity and pharmacokinetics of ethylene glycol 
(EG) in the dog.
All dogs received 173 mmol/kg EG, p.o.
Dogs were randomly 
assigned to 3 groups: EG-treated only, EG + ethanol (19.3 mmol/kg, i.v.
3, 7, 14 
and 24 h after EG) and EG + 4MP (0.24 mmol/kg, i.v.
3 h after EG, 0.18 mmol/kg 
at 24 h and 0.06 mmol/kg at 36 h).
EG produced a rapid onset of metabolic 
acidosis (within 3 h) and acute oliguric renal failure (after 48 h), whereas 
administration of ethanol or 4MP greatly attenuated acidosis and prevented renal 
toxicity.
The administration of ethanol, however, severely increased the central 
nervous system (CNS) depression that existed after ingestion of EG.
The 
half-life of FG in serum was 10.8 +/- 0.7 h in the EG-only treatment group, 6.8 
+/- 0.7 (P less than 0.05) in the EG + ethanol group and 9.8 +/- 0.9 h in the EG 
+ 4MP group.
Approx.
10% and 48% of the dose of EG was excreted unchanged in the 
urine at the 0-3 and 3-72 h periods, respectively.
Treatment with 4MP increased 
the amount of EG excreted in the urine (71% from 3-72 h), whereas ethanol did 
not (51%).
However, both ethanol and 4MP increased the rate constant of EG 
excretion into urine approx.
70%.
These data demonstrate the utility of 4MP over 
ethanol for the treatment of EG-induced toxicity in dogs and indicate that 
ethanol and 4MP cause an increase in the rate constant of EG excretion in the 
urine and not a prolongation in EG half-life.
DOI: 10.1016/0378-4274(87)90220-7
PMID: 3824418 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Clinical observations on the action of NC 123
 a new medium tranquilizer].
1.
Wien Med Wochenschr.
1967 Nov 4;117(44):998-1000.
[Clinical observations on the action of NC 123, a new medium tranquilizer].
[Article in German]

Smolik R, Zukowski W, Gruszka S.

PMID: 4873607 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Loss of inhibition precedes delayed spontaneous seizures in the hippocampus after tetanic electrical stimulation <jats:p> 1. The electrophysiological consequences of a "continuous" hippocampal stimulation protocol consisting of 10-s-long stimulus trains administered every 11 s for 90 min to the hippocampus of urethane-anesthetized rats were studied. During the period of stimulation
 there was an initial phase with tonic discharges occurring every 1-2 min followed by a secondary phase in which there were well-demarcated recurrent clonic seizures.
2.
At the end of the 90 min stimulation period, 7 out of a total of 14 animals studied show epileptiform activity that lasted one-half hour.
The other half show disappearance of epileptiform activity within 2 min after terminating the stimulus.
In all the animals a quiescent period then followed.
In 11 of the animals studied, spontaneous seizures reappeared after the quiescent period had been present for several hours.
3.
A paired-pulse method that in previous studies had been shown to reflect the functional state of GABAergic inhibition was employed.
Paired-pulse depression in the CA1 region of the hippocampus was measured before administration of stimulus trains, in the quiescent period following the trains, and during and after spontaneous seizures.
By comparing indices of maximal inhibition under the various experimental conditions, estimates of the relative amount of inhibition lost could be made.
4.
All animals showed reduction of paired-pulse depression in the quiescent period following stimulation when compared with prestimulation values.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 WORDS) </jats:p>
Differential regulation of corticosteroid receptors by monoamine neurotransmitters and antidepressant drugs in primary hippocampal culture 1. Neuroscience. 2003;118(4):975-84. doi: 10.1016/s0306-4522(03)00038-1.

Differential regulation of corticosteroid receptors by monoamine 
neurotransmitters and antidepressant drugs in primary hippocampal culture.

Lai M(1)
 McCormick JA, Chapman KE, Kelly PA, Seckl JR, Yau JL.
Author information:
(1)Endocrinology Unit, Molecular Medicine Centre, University of Edinburgh, 
Western General Hospital, Edinburgh EH4 2XU, UK.
m.lai@ed.ac.uk

Hyperactivity of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis is a characteristic 
feature of depressive illness.
The centrally located corticosteroid receptors, 
the glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptors, are thought to be important 
modulators of this axis and changes in the levels of these receptors, 
particularly in the hippocampus, may underlie the hyperactivity observed.
Various antidepressant drugs increase hippocampal mineralocorticoid and 
glucocorticoid receptor levels in vivo.
These effects are thought to be mediated 
via alterations in monoaminergic neurotransmission.
We examined whether 
serotonin (5HT) and noradrenaline (NA) have direct effects on glucocorticoid 
receptor and mineralocorticoid receptor expression in primary hippocampal 
neurones, and whether antidepressants also exert direct effects on target 
neurones.
Exposure of hippocampal cells to 5HT for 4 days increased both 
glucocorticoid and mineralocorticoid receptor mRNA and protein expression.
The 
induction of mineralocorticoid receptor mRNA was completely blocked by the 
5HT(7) receptor antagonist SB 269970.
In contrast glucocorticoid receptor 
induction was insensitive to the 5HT(7) receptor, whilst studies with the 
5HT(1A) receptor agonist 8-hydroxy-2-(di-n-proplamino) tetralin hydrochloride 
and the 5HT(1A) receptor antagonist 
N-[2-[4-2-[O-methoxyphenyl)-1-piperazinyl]ethyl]-N-(2-pyridinyl) cyclohexane 
carboxamide trihydrochloride (WAY 100635) suggest a partial role for 5HT(1A) 
receptors in hippocampal glucocorticoid receptor regulation.
Treatment with NA 
for 4 days also increased glucocorticoid receptor expression but had no effect 
on mineralocorticoid receptor expression.
This was blocked by propanolol 
suggesting action via beta-adrenergic receptors.
Similarly to NA, fluoxetine and 
amitriptyline also selectively increased glucocorticoid receptor mRNA and 
protein levels over this time course.
However, glucocorticoid receptor induction 
by fluoxetine or amitriptyline was not blocked by WAY 100635 or propanolol.
These results show that 5HT, NA and antidepressants act directly but via 
distinct mechanisms on hippocampal neurones to regulate mineralocorticoid and 
glucocorticoid receptor expression.
Thusly, manipulation of neurotransmitter or 
antidepressant levels in the brain may aid in reversing 
hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal axis hyperactivity by restoring hippocampal 
corticosteroid receptor balance.
DOI: 10.1016/s0306-4522(03)00038-1
PMID: 12732243 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Alterations in phospholipidomic profile in the brain of mouse model of depression induced by chronic unpredictable stress 1. Neuroscience. 2014 Jul 25;273:1-11. doi: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.04.042. 
Epub 2014 May 6.

Alterations in phospholipidomic profile in the brain of mouse model of 
depression induced by chronic unpredictable stress.

Faria R(1)
 Santana MM(2), Aveleira CA(3), Simões C(1), Maciel E(1), Melo T(1), 
Santinha D(1), Oliveira MM(4), Peixoto F(5), Domingues P(1), Cavadas C(2), 
Domingues MR(6).
Author information:
(1)Mass Spectrometry Centre, UI-QOPNA, Department of Chemistry, University of 
Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.
(2)Faculty of Pharmacy, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal; CNC - Center 
for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, Coimbra, Portugal.
(3)CNC - Center for Neuroscience and Cell Biology, University of Coimbra, 
Coimbra, Portugal.
(4)CQVR, Chemistry Department, University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro, Vila 
Real, Portugal.
(5)CITAB, University of Trás-os-Montes and Alto Douro, Vila Real, Portugal.
(6)Mass Spectrometry Centre, UI-QOPNA, Department of Chemistry, University of 
Aveiro, 3810-193 Aveiro, Portugal.
Electronic address: mrd@ua.pt.
Depression is a worldwide disability disease associated with high morbidity and 
has increased dramatically in the last few years.
The differential diagnosis and 
the definition of an individualized therapy for depression are hampered by the 
absence of specific biomarkers.
The aim of this study was to evaluate the 
phospholipidomic profile of the brain and myocardium in a mouse model of 
depression induced by chronic unpredictable stress (CUS).
The lipidomic profile 
was evaluated by thin layer and liquid chromatography and mass spectrometry and 
lipid oxidation was estimated by FOX II assay.
Antioxidant enzyme activity and 
the oxidized/reduced glutathione (GSH/GSSG) ratio were also evaluated.
Results 
showed that chronic stress affects primarily the lipid profile of the brain, 
inducing an increase in lipid hydroperoxides, which was not detected in the 
myocardium.
A significant decrease in phosphatidylinositol (PI) and in 
cardiolipin (CL) relative contents and also oxidation of CL and a significant 
increase of phosphatidylcholine (PC) and phosphatidylethanolamine (PE) were 
observed in the brain of mice after unpredictable chronic stress conditions.
In 
the myocardium only an increase in PC content was observed.
Nevertheless, both 
organs present a decreased GSH/GSSG ratio when compared to control groups, 
corroborating the occurrence of oxidative stress.
The enzyme activities of 
catalase (CAT) and superoxide dismutase (SOD) were found to be decreased in the 
myocardium and increased in the brain, while glutathione reductase (GR) was 
decreased in the brain.
Our results indicate that in a mouse model for studying 
depression induced by CUS, the modification of the expression of oxidative 
stress-related enzymes did not prevent lipid oxidation in organs, particularly 
in the brain.
These observations suggest that depression has an impact on the 
brain lipidome and that further studies are needed to better understand lipids 
role in depression and to evaluate their potential as future biomarkers.
Copyright © 2014 IBRO.
Published by Elsevier Ltd. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neuroscience.2014.04.042
PMID: 24814727 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Kinetics of rate‐dependent slowing of intraventricular conduction by the class Ib antiarrhythmic agent tocainide <i>in vivo</i> <jats:p><jats:list list-type="explicit-label">
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The effects of the class I antiarrhythmic agent
 tocainide, on intraventricular conduction were assessed in guinea‐pigs, anaesthetized with pentobarbitone sodium 60 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>, i.p.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>After electrical ablation of the sinus node, heart rate was controlled by atrial pacing.
His bundle electrograms were recorded by means of an epicardial bipolar electrode.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>During continuous stimulation, comparison of HV intervals measured at a cycle length of 475 ms, with HV intervals measured at a cycle length of 250 ms yielded the following results: 25.26 ± 0.64 ms versus 25.02 ± 0.70 ms (NS), at baseline, 26.65 ± 0.80 ms versus 29.881 1.13 ms (<jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.001) after i.v.
administration of 30 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> tocainide, and 28.04 ± 0.64 ms versus 36.24 ± 1.31 ms (<jats:italic>P</jats:italic> &lt; 0.001), after addition of 20 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> tocainide.
Thus, tocainide caused HV intervals to increase in a strictly rate‐dependent fashion.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>In order to characterize the rate‐dependent class I activity of tocainide in terms of its binding kinetics to sodium channels, fractional sodium channel block was estimated from drug induced reductions of intraventricular conduction velocity (Δθ).
On abruptly changing the drive cycle length from 500 ms to 250 ms, Δθ reached a new steady state with rate constants of 1.23 ± 0.09 beat<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> and 1.28 ± 0.09 beat<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup>, after administration of 30 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> and addition of 20 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> tocainide, respectively.
At a basic drive cycle length of 250 ms Δθ recovered with time constants of 250.29 ± 23.32 ms and 183.04 ± 8.03 ms after administration of 30 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> and addition of 20 mg kg<jats:sup>−1</jats:sup> tocainide, respectively.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>The experimentally determined kinetic parameters were implemented into a mathematical model that assumes drug binding to sodium channels in terms of a periodical two‐state process.
Rate‐dependent reductions in conduction velocity during continuous stimulation after administration of tocainide were closely approximated by steady state reductions in sodium channel availability as calculated on the basis of the aforementioned model.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
<jats:list-item><jats:p>In agreement with previously published <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> studies, our data, obtained <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic>, confirm the classification of tocainide as a class I antiarrhythmic agent with fast onset and offset kinetics.
The kinetic parameters obtained <jats:italic>in vivo</jats:italic> can be used in order to predict steady state reductions in conduction velocity at a wide range of frequencies.</jats:p></jats:list-item>
</jats:list></jats:p>
Inhibition of corticosteroid production by sodium pentobarbitone in rat adrenocortical preparations <jats:title>ABSTRACT</jats:title>
        <jats:p>It is possible that some of the effects of sodium pentobarbitone on the hypothalamo-pituitary-adrenal axis in the intact animal may be attributable to direct actions on the adrenal cortex. The effects of the barbiturate on steroid production by rat adrenal preparations <jats:italic>in vitro</jats:italic> have therefore been examined. In zona glomerulosa cells
 pentobarbitone inhibited basal steroid production in a dose-related fashion.
For aldosterone and corticosterone, the doses required for 50% inhibition of production (IC<jats:sub>50</jats:sub>) were 1·2 mmol pentobarbitone/l and 3·7 mmol/l respectively.
Steroidogenesis was inhibited at lower levels of pentobarbitone in the presence of 1 nmol ACTH/l (IC<jats:sub>50</jats:sub> = 0·5 mmol pentobarbitone/l for aldosterone and 2·2 mmol/l for corticosterone).
In zona fasciculata/reticularis cells, production of corticosterone was similarly reduced with an IC<jats:sub>50</jats:sub> of 2·8 mmol pentobarbitone/l for basal production and 1·3 mmol/l for ACTH-stimulated production.
The dose-related increases in corticosterone production produced by ACTH (0·1–1000 pmol/l) or dibutyryl cyclic AMP (0·1–1·0 mmol/l) were also eliminated in the presence of 2 mmol pentobarbitone/l.
The effects of pentobarbitone (1–4 mmol/l) on the production of pregnenolone and deoxycorticosterone (DOC) were also studied.
In zona fasciculata/reticularis cells, the responses of both pregnenolone and DOC were bell-shaped with increases at 1 mmol pentobarbitone/l, which fell back to control levels at 4 mmol pentobarbitone/l.
Stimulation of DOC, accompanied by decreases in aldosterone and corticosterone production, was also seen in zona glomerulosa cells at 1 mmol pentobarbitone/l.</jats:p>
        <jats:p>The effect of 1 mmol pentobarbitone/l on the conversion of 22(R)-hydroxycholesterol (5-cholestene-3β,22(R)-diol), pregnenolone, progesterone and DOC to corticosterone and aldosterone by zona glomerulosa preparations was studied.
There was a comparable reduction in the conversion of these precursors (2 μmol/l) to aldosterone with yields decreased to 20–30% of those found in the absence of pentobarbitone.
The dose required for 50% reduction of the conversion of progesterone (2 μmol/l) to aldosterone was 0·55 mmol pentobarbitone/l and for corticosterone the dose was 1·75 mmol pentobarbitone/l.</jats:p>
        <jats:p>The results obtained show that pentobarbitone is an effective inhibitor of corticosteroid biosynthesis in rat adrenal cells, and suggest that its effects are brought about by inhibition of cytochrome P450-mediated hydroxylations.</jats:p>
        <jats:p><jats:italic>Journal of Endocrinology</jats:italic> (1993) <jats:bold>136,</jats:bold> 75–83</jats:p>
Pop
 heavy metal and the blues: secondary analysis of persistent organic pollutants (POP), heavy metals and depressive symptoms in the NHANES National Epidemiological Survey <jats:sec><jats:title>Objectives</jats:title><jats:p>Persistent environmental pollutants, including heavy metals and persistent organic pollutants (POPs), have a ubiquitous presence.
Many of these pollutants affect neurobiological processes, either accidentally or by design.
The aim of this study was to explore the associations between assayed measures of POPs and heavy metals and depressive symptoms.
We hypothesised that higher levels of pollutants and metals would be associated with depressive symptoms.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Setting</jats:title><jats:p>National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES).</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Participants</jats:title><jats:p>A total of 15 140 eligible people were included across the three examined waves of NHANES.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Primary and secondary outcome measures</jats:title><jats:p>Depressive symptoms were assessed using the nine-item version of the Patient Health Questionnaire (PHQ-9), using a cut-off point of 9/10 as likely depression cases.
Organic pollutants and heavy metals, including cadmium, lead and mercury, as well as polyfluorinated compounds (PFCs), pesticides, phenols and phthalates, were measured in blood or urine.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Results</jats:title><jats:p>Higher cadmium was positively associated with depression (adjusted Prevalence Ratios (PR)=1.48, 95% CI 1.16 to 1.90).
Higher levels of mercury were negatively associated with depression (adjusted PR=0.62, 95% CI 0.50 to 0.78), and mercury was associated with increased fish consumption (n=5500, r=0.366, p&lt;0.001).
In addition, several PFCs (perfluorooctanoic acid, perfluorohexane sulfonic acid, perfluorodecanoic acid and perfluorononanoic acid) were negatively associated with the prevalence of depression.</jats:p></jats:sec><jats:sec><jats:title>Conclusions</jats:title><jats:p>Cadmium was associated with an increased likelihood of depression.
Contrary to hypotheses, many of persistent environmental pollutants were not associated or negatively associated with depression.
While the inverse association between mercury and depressive symptoms may be explained by a protective role for fish consumption, the negative associations with other pollutants remains unclear.
This exploratory study suggests the need for further investigation of the role of various agents and classes of agents in the pathophysiology of depression.</jats:p></jats:sec>
Small-Molecule Inhibitors at the PSD-95/nNOS Interface have Antidepressant-Like Properties in Mice 1. Neuropsychopharmacology. 2013 Jul;38(8):1575-84. doi: 10.1038/npp.2013.57.
Epub  2013 Feb 27.

Small-molecule inhibitors at the PSD-95/nNOS interface have antidepressant-like 
properties in mice.

Doucet MV(1)
 Levine H, Dev KK, Harkin A.
Author information:
(1)Neuropsychopharmacology Research Group, School of Pharmacy and Pharmaceutical 
Sciences and Trinity College Institute of Neuroscience, Trinity College, Dublin, 
Ireland.
Previous studies have demonstrated that nitric oxide (NO) synthase inhibitors 
are as efficacious as tricyclic antidepressants in preclinical antidepressant 
screening procedures and in attenuating behavioural deficits associated with 
animal models of depression.
The N-methyl-D-aspartate receptor (NMDA-R) complex 
gates Ca(2+), which interacts with calmodulin to subsequently activate NO 
synthase.
We hypothesised that uncoupling neuronal nitric oxide synthase (nNOS) 
from the NMDA-R through the scaffolding protein postsynaptic density protein 95 
(PSD-95) would produce behavioural antidepressant effects similar to NO synthase 
inhibitors.
Small-molecule inhibitors of the PSD-95/nNOS interaction, IC87201 
(0.01-2 mg/kg) and ZL006 (10 mg/kg) were tested for antidepressant properties in 
tests of antidepressant activity namely the tail suspension and forced swim 
tests in mice.
We now report that IC87201 and ZL006 produce antidepressant-like 
responses in the forced swimming test (FST) and tail suspension test (TST) 
following a single administration in mice.
By contrast to the tricyclic 
antidepressant imipramine (25 mg/kg), the effects are not observed 1 h following 
drug administration but are apparent 24 and 72 h later.
Furthermore prior 
exposure to the TST or FST is required in order to observe the 
antidepressant-related activity.
Similar delayed and sustained 
antidepressant-like effects were observed following TRIM (50 mg/kg) and ketamine 
(30 mg/kg) in the TST.
The antidepressant-like effects of ZL006 also generalise 
to IC87201 in the TST.
IC87201 was devoid of effects on locomotor activity and 
step-through latency in the passive avoidance cognition test.
These data support 
the hypothesis that targeting the PSD-95/nNOS interaction downstream of NMDA-R 
produces antidepressant effects and may represent a novel class of therapeutics 
for major depressive disorders.
DOI: 10.1038/npp.2013.57
PMCID: PMC3682152
PMID: 23446451 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
STUDIES ON EJACULATION 1. Nihon Hinyokika Gakkai Zasshi. 1973 Jan;64(1):12-30.

[Studies on ejaculation. 5. The effects of autonomic drugs on seminal emission 
and ejaculation].

[Article in Japanese]

Miyata K.

PMID: 4738858 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Activity-dependent depression of mechanosensory discharge in Aplysia <jats:p> 1. Inhibition of action potential discharge in Aplysia mechanosensory neurons after noxious stimulation has not been described previously. The present studies investigated depressive effects of prolonged noxious stimulation and repetitive intracellular activation on the number and latency of action potentials evoked by test stimuli applied to the tail or the nerve innervating the tail. Action potential discharge was monitored in the somata of mechanonociceptors in the pleural ganglia. 2. Repeated brief pinches delivered at 5-s intervals to a sensory neuron's receptive field on the tail initially caused intense activation (10-25 spikes recorded in the soma) followed by a progressive decrease or "wind-down" of spike number during subsequent pinches. 3. Repeated application to the tail of noxious shock that caused intense activation of sensory neurons (10-22 spikes during the initial shock) produced progressive wind-down of discharge similar to that produced by repeated tail pinch. However
 sensory neurons that showed lower activation (1-9 spikes) to the same shock displayed wind-up of discharge during the 10 shocks.
These results suggested that prolonged, intense activation depresses subsequent action potential discharge.
4.
Changes in the time required for spikes evoked in the tail to reach the central soma were used as an indicator of changes in the excitability and/or conduction velocity of peripheral branches.
Repeated pinch within a sensory neuron's receptive field caused an increase in the latency of discharge elicited by test shocks within the receptive field that lasted &gt; or = 10 min.
Repetitive intracellular stimulation of the sensory neuron soma caused a similar increase in latency.
5.
Repetitive soma activation decreased the number of spikes evoked 10 s later by a test shock in the sensory neuron's receptive field, indicating that spike activity depresses the initiation and/or conduction of spikes in peripheral branches.
Surprisingly, repeated pinch to the receptive field caused no significant change in the number of spikes evoked by the same test shock.
This difference suggests that tail pinch produces concomitant facilitatory effects that oppose the depressive effects of intense spike activity.
6.
Depressive effects of repeated pinch and repetitive soma activation were expressed in the axon between the receptive field and the CNS.
Spikes evoked by brief test shocks delivered to the nerve containing the axon of the recorded sensory neuron showed a transient increase in latency (perhaps due to a decrease in conduction velocity) after either procedure.
Repeated pinch, but not repetitive soma activation, also caused an increase in spike threshold in the nerve.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 400 WORDS) </jats:p>
Female reproductive system of the decapitating fly Pseudacteon wasmanni Schmitz (Diptera: Phoridae) 1. Arthropod Struct Dev. 2003 Apr;31(4):329-37. doi:
10.1016/S1467-8039(02)00049-X.

Female reproductive system of the decapitating fly Pseudacteon wasmanni Schmitz 
(Diptera: Phoridae).

Zacaro AA(1)
 Porter SD.
Author information:
(1)Departamento de Biologia, UNESP, CP 199, CEP 13506-900, Rio Claro, SP, 
Brazil.
Pseudacteon wasmanni is a South American decapitating fly that parasitizes 
workers of Solenopsis fire ants.
We used light microscopy (historesin 
serial-sectioning stained with Haematoxylin/Eosin) and scanning electron 
microscopy to show and analyze internal and whole external views of the female 
reproductive system.
All specimens analyzed (n=9) by light microscopy showed 
post-vitellogenic oocytes inside the ovaries.
The lack of typical follicles 
(oocyte-nurse cell complexes) in all specimens suggests that oogenesis occurs 
during the pupal stage.
The total number of eggs found ranged from 31 to 280 
(X=142+/-73, SD).
The egg has a slugform or torpedo shape (about 130 by 20 
microm) with a pointed apex at the posterior pole as defined by the fly; the 
micropyle appears to be in a depression or invagination at the anterior pole.
An 
acute hypodermic-like ovipositor is evaginated from the hard sclerotized 
external genitalia during egg laying.
The existence of a muscular bulb 
associated with the end of the common oviduct suggests that the egg is injected 
into the ant's body by a strong contraction of the bulb which probably is 
stimulated by bending of several ventral sensilla.
During contraction, the 
abdomen extends out along a large fold between the sixth and seventh tergites in 
such a way that the sclerotized genitalia is rotated ventrally into a slightly 
anterior orientation in preparation for oviposition.
DOI: 10.1016/S1467-8039(02)00049-X
PMID: 18088990
Food carrying in rats is blocked by the putative anxiolytic agent buspirone 1. Pharmacol Biochem Behav. 1994 Nov;49(3):741-6. doi: 
10.1016/0091-3057(94)90095-7.

Food carrying in rats is blocked by the putative anxiolytic agent buspirone.

Dringenberg HC(1)
 Kornelsen RA, Vanderwolf CH.
Author information:
(1)Neuroscience Program, University of Western Ontario, London, Canada.
The effects of the putative anxiolytic agent buspirone on food-handling behavior 
of laboratory rats were investigated.
Rats trained to travel from a covered 
shelter to a food source were provided with food pellets of six sizes.
Smaller 
pellets were eaten at the exposed food source, whereas larger pellets were 
carried back to the shelter for consumption.
Subcutaneous administration of 
buspirone hydrochloride (0.2-2.0 mg/kg) reduced carrying of larger food pellets 
in a dose-dependent manner.
Instead, these pellets were also eaten at the 
exposed food source.
Carrying was maximally suppressed 1 h after drug 
administration.
Handling of smaller pellets, travel times, and eating times were 
not affected by buspirone.
Similar results have previously been obtained with 
diazepam.
Buspirone appears to exert its effects through 5-HT1A and/or dopamine 
receptors, whereas diazepam interacts with benzodiazepine receptors.
Thus, 
manipulations of distinct transmitter systems may have similar behavioral 
consequences on the food carrying responses of rats.
DOI: 10.1016/0091-3057(94)90095-7
PMID: 7862731 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Pharmacological characterization of an endogenous negative inotrophic factor (ENIF) from porcine heart. 1. Mol Cell Biochem. 1998 Jan;178(1-2):135-9. doi: 10.1023/a:1006841511590.

Pharmacological characterization of an endogenous negative inotrophic factor 
(ENIF) from porcine heart.

Zhang M(1)
 Paskvalin M, Khatter JC.
Author information:
(1)Department of Internal Medicine, University of Manitoba Winnipeg, Canada.
Recently we have been successful in isolating an endogenous negative inotropic 
factor (ENIF) from porcine left ventricular tissue.
In this study, we have 
characterized its pharmacological properties.
The results of the study 
demonstrated that ENIF produces a concentration-dependent negative inotropic 
response on both guinea pig left atria and right ventricular trabeculae.
The 
maximal reduction in contractile force produced by 300 ul of ENIF (5 ml bath) on 
atria and trabeculae were 90.0 +/- 0.8% and 77.5 +/- 6%.
Atria, however, was 
significantly more sensitive to ENIF than trabeculae.
The ED 50 of ENIF for 
atria was found to be 38 ul as opposed to ED 50 of 100 ul of ENIF for 
trabeculae.
Acetylcholine (ACh), a muscarinic receptor agonist, decreased the 
contractile force of guinea pig atria in a dose-dependent manner with a maximal 
decline in the contractile force of 90%.
However, none of the concentration of 
ACh used affected the contractile function of the trabeculae.
Atropine (1 uM) 
completely blocked the negative inotropic response on atria of all the doses of 
ACh used.
The same dose of atropine, however, was unable to influence the 
negative inotropic effect of any of the doses of ENIF used on either the atria 
or trabeculae preparations in our study.
The maximal decline in the contractile 
force of atria was e.g.
94 and 95% in the presence and absence of atropine 
respectively.
These data demonstrate that the myocardial negative inotropic 
effect of ENIF is not mediated via the cholinegic receptor mechanism.
DOI: 10.1023/a:1006841511590
PMID: 9546592 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Mechanisms of termination of reentrant atrial arrhythmias by class I and class III antiarrhythmic agents. <jats:p>We studied atrial flutter due to circus movement in chronically instrumented conscious dogs to identify the mechanism by which class I and class III antiarrhythmic drugs terminate reentrant excitation. We used a crossover experimental design administering five class I agents and one class III agent
 by intravenous bolus followed by intravenous infusion.
The class I agents other than lidocaine were almost uniformly effective in terminating the arrhythmia (disopyramide in six of seven dogs, propafenone in six of six, flecainide in seven of seven, and SC-40230 in seven of seven).
Termination was preceded by a marked increase in cycle length (ranging from +78% with propafenone to +55% with disopyramide), but with the exception of disopyramide, class I agents did not significantly shorten the excitable gap.
With disopyramide the gap decreased from 49 +/- 3% to 28 +/- 3% of the cycle length.
With no class I agent did the wavelength of effective refractoriness increase to approach the cycle length of the arrhythmia.
Lidocaine, used as a negative control, terminated the reentry in one dog with modest prolongation of the cycle length.
Terminations with class I agents correlated with depression of conduction rather than prolongation of refractoriness.
In contrast with class I agents, D-sotalol prolonged the cycle length minimally (+10%) and terminated the arrhythmia in six of seven dogs.
It decreased the excitable gap from 42 +/- 4% to 26 +/- 6% of the cycle, but it still did not cause the wavelength of effective refractoriness to equal the cycle length.
Terminations by D-sotalol seemed to result from either failure of the lateral boundaries of the circus path or reflection within the path.</jats:p>
GABAB-receptor modulation of short-term synaptic depression at an excitatory input to murine hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons 1. Neurosci Lett. 2004 Jul 15;365(1):48-53. doi: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.04.050.

GABA(B)-receptor modulation of short-term synaptic depression at an excitatory 
input to murine hippocampal CA3 pyramidal neurons.

Hoskison MM(1)
 Connor JA, Shuttleworth CW.
Author information:
(1)Department of Neurosciences, University of New Mexico School of Medicine, 
MSC08 4740, 1 University of New Mexico, Albuquerque, NM 87131-0001, USA.
GABA(B) agonists inhibit excitatory transmission to hippocampal CA3 neurons 
during low frequency stimulation.
We examined whether GABA(B) receptor 
activation can also enhance synaptic efficacy, when investigated at an input 
with high initial release probability.
Short-term depression of field excitatory 
postsynaptic potential (EPSP) amplitude was observed during trains of stimuli 
applied to associational/commissural inputs (10-50 Hz; 22 degrees C).
Baclofen 
(10 microM) reduced the amplitude of initial EPSPs in a train, and also reduced 
the degree of short-term depression.
EPSPs recorded late in a train were 
significantly larger in baclofen than those recorded in control solution.
These 
dual effects were mimicked by another selective GABA(B) agonist (SKF 97541, 10 
microM), and abolished by a GABA(B)-selective antagonist (SCH 50911, 20 microM).
The effects of baclofen were similar at a higher recording temperature (32 
degrees C), where short-term depression was observed at higher stimulation 
frequencies.
These results are consistent with the idea that a reduction of 
transmitter release probability could increase the fidelity of high-frequency 
transmission at this input, an effect that could help account for excitatory 
effects of GABA(B) agonists in some seizure models.
DOI: 10.1016/j.neulet.2004.04.050
PMID: 15234471 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
L-Type Calcium Channels Mediate Mechanically Induced Bone Formation In Vivo <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>Cell and tissue culture studies suggest that the long-lasting (L-type) voltage-sensitive calcium channels (VSCC) play a role in the signaling cascade in bone cells after mechanical loading. We investigated whether the L-type VSCC mediates mechanically induced bone formation in vivo using two L-type VSCC antagonists verapamil and nifedipine. Female Sprague-Dawley rats were divided into five groups: control group (Veh)
 two verapamil-treated groups (20 mg/kg, Vera-L; 100 mg/kg, Vera-H), and two nifedipine-treated groups (20 mg/kg, Nife-L; 100 mg/kg, Nife-H).
One bout of mechanical loading was applied to the right tibia 90 minutes after oral administration of verapamil or 30 minutes after oral administration of nifedipine.
Mechanical loading increased mineralizing surface (MS/bone surface [BS]), mineral apposition rate (MAR), and bone formation rate (BFR/BS) on the endocortical surface in loaded tibias of control animals compared with nonloaded (left) tibias.
Verapamil and nifedipine suppressed the load-induced increase in BFR/BS observed in vehicle-treated controls by 56–61% (p &amp;lt; 0.01) and 56–74% (p &amp;lt; 0.01), respectively.
Yet, significant differences in MS/BS and BFR/BS between right and left limbs were found in verapamil- and nifedipine-treated animals, indicating that the treatments did not completely abolish load-induced bone formation.
This study shows that blocking the L-type calcium channel in vivo substantially suppresses the mechanically induced increase in bone formation that normally would occur and suggests that the L-type calcium channel mediates mechanically induced bone adaptation in vivo.</jats:p>
Body temperature depression and peripheral heat loss accompany the metabolic and ventilatory responses to hypoxia in low and high altitude birds <jats:title>SUMMARY</jats:title><jats:p>The objectives of this study were to compare the thermoregulatory
metabolic and ventilatory responses to hypoxia of the high altitude bar-headed goose with low altitude waterfowl.
All birds were found to reduce body temperature (Tb) during hypoxia, by up to 1–1.5°C in severe hypoxia.
During prolonged hypoxia, Tb stabilized at a new lower temperature.
A regulated increase in heat loss contributed to Tb depression as reflected by increases in bill surface temperatures (up to 5°C) during hypoxia.
Bill warming required peripheral chemoreceptor inputs, since vagotomy abolished this response to hypoxia.
Tb depression could still occur without bill warming, however, because vagotomized birds reduced Tb as much as intact birds.
Compared to both greylag geese and pekin ducks, bar-headed geese required more severe hypoxia to initiate Tb depression and heat loss from the bill.
However, when Tb depression or bill warming were expressed relative to arterial O2 concentration (rather than inspired O2) all species were similar; this suggests that enhanced O2 loading,rather than differences in thermoregulatory control centres, reduces Tb depression during hypoxia in bar-headed geese.
Correspondingly, bar-headed geese maintained higher rates of metabolism during severe hypoxia (7% inspired O2), but this was only partly due to differences in Tb.
Time domains of the hypoxic ventilatory response also appeared to differ between bar-headed geese and low altitude species.
Overall, our results suggest that birds can adjust peripheral heat dissipation to facilitate Tb depression during hypoxia,and that bar-headed geese minimize Tb and metabolic depression as a result of evolutionary adaptations that enhance O2transport.</jats:p>
Tegumental changes of Alaria marcianae (Trematoda) during migration in the domestic cat. 1. J Parasitol. 1984 Apr;70(2):244-52.

Tegumental changes of Alaria marcianae (Trematoda) during migration in the 
domestic cat.

Shoop WL
 Corkum KC.
Mesocercariae of Alaria marcianae were removed from snake paratenic hosts and 
fed to domestic cats.
The cats were necropsied at specified intervals, the 
parasites recovered, and studied by SEM.
During the prepulmonary phase of 
migration in cats, mesocercariae recovered from the stomach wall, abdominal 
cavity, diaphragm, liver, and heart underwent no tegumental modification 
compared to those fixed immediately after removal from the paratenic host.
The 
mesocercaria resembled the body of an enlarged cercaria.
The oral sucker was 
encircled by 14 or 15 rows of simple, posteriorly directed spines.
Similar 
spines were also located along the margins of the venter and equatorially at the 
level of the acetabulum.
This spinal pattern left two regions, one anterior and 
one posterior to the acetabulum, devoid of spines.
Uniciliate papillae were 
found in a distinct pattern associated with the spined areas.
In the pulmonary 
phase, the mesocercariae transformed into diplostomula.
Earlike lappets on 
either side of the oral sucker developed with subsequent differentiation of 
microvilliform processes on their ventral sides.
Body spines divided to give 
rise to three-pronged serrations.
A depression on the venter between the 
acetabulum and posterior end of the body gave rise to the tribocytic organ.
Stout, densely-clustered spines arose de novo on this organ.
A rudimentary 
cylindrical hindbody gave the diplostomulum a distinct scoop-shaped appearance.
Worms coughed up from the lungs and swallowed were later found in the duodenum.
This postpulmonary phase of migration was a quick event and young worms in the 
duodenum were indistinguishable from those in the lungs.
Within 4 days, the 
diplostomula in the duodenum matured to adulthood.
(ABSTRACT TRUNCATED AT 250 
WORDS)

PMID: 6470887 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Correlation of Immune Response with Clinical Stage in Lewis Lung Tumor-bearing Mice 1. Oncology. 1978;35(4):155-9. doi: 10.1159/000225275.

Correlation of immune response with clinical stage in Lewis lung tumor-bearing 
mice.

Kurata T
 Micksche M.

The effect of Lewis lung tumor growth in mice on the induction of primary immune 
response to SRBC, was investigated by PFC assay for measuring antibody activity 
and by footpad test as a correlate for delayed type hypersensitivity reactions.
With the appearance of micrometastases in the lungs there was a decline in the 
humoral and cellular immune response to the SRBC.
An increase of number and size 
of metastases in the lungs led to a further depression of the immune reactivity.
Since the reduction of general immune response in mice bearing this tumor is not 
due to a direct influence of tumor cells, it might be assumed that suppressor 
cells or factors, are actively abrogating the general and also the tumor 
directed immune reactions.
DOI: 10.1159/000225275
PMID: 704036 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of oxytocin on recollections of maternal care and closeness <jats:p>Although the infant–caregiver attachment bond is critical to survival
 little is known about the biological mechanisms supporting attachment representations in humans.
Oxytocin plays a key role in attachment bond formation and maintenance in animals and thus could be expected to affect attachment representations in humans.
To investigate this possibility, we administered 24 IU intranasal oxytocin to healthy male adults in a double-blind, placebo-controlled, crossover designed study and then assessed memories of childhood maternal care and closeness—two features of the attachment bond.
We found that the effects of oxytocin were moderated by the attachment representations people possess, with less anxiously attached individuals remembering their mother as more caring and close after oxytocin (vs. placebo) but more anxiously attached individuals remembering their mother as less caring and close after oxytocin (vs. placebo).
These data contrast with the popular notion that oxytocin has broad positive effects on social perception and are more consistent with the animal literature, which emphasizes oxytocin's role in encoding social memories and linking those memories to the reward value of the social stimulus.</jats:p>
The MK2/3 cascade regulates AMPAR trafficking and cognitive flexibility <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title><jats:p>The interplay between long-term potentiation and long-term depression (LTD) is thought to be involved in learning and memory formation. One form of LTD expressed in the hippocampus is initiated by the activation of the group 1 metabotropic glutamate receptors (mGluRs). Importantly
 mGluRs have been shown to be critical for acquisition of new memories and for reversal learning, processes that are thought to be crucial for cognitive flexibility.
Here we provide evidence that MAPK-activated protein kinases 2 and 3 (MK2/3) regulate neuronal spine morphology, synaptic transmission and plasticity.
Furthermore, mGluR-LTD is impaired in the hippocampus of MK2/3 double knockout (DKO) mice, an observation that is mirrored by deficits in endocytosis of GluA1 subunits.
Consistent with compromised mGluR-LTD, MK2/3 DKO mice have distinctive deficits in hippocampal-dependent spatial reversal learning.
These novel findings demonstrate that the MK2/3 cascade plays a strategic role in controlling synaptic plasticity and cognition.</jats:p>
The Relation of Radiation Dosage to Enhancement
 Depression, and Recovery of the Initial Forssman Hemolysin Response in Rabbits 1.
J Infect Dis.
1964 Oct;114:285-303. doi: 10.1093/infdis/114.4.285.
THE RELATION OF RADIATION DOSAGE TO ENHANCEMENT, DEPRESSION, AND RECOVERY OF THE 
INITIAL FORSSMAN HEMOLYSIN RESPONSE IN RABBITS.
TALIAFERRO WH, TALIAFERRO LG.
DOI: 10.1093/infdis/114.4.285
PMID: 14217927 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
[Comparison of the action of barbiturates and chloralose on the potentials of the dorsal root]. 1. J Physiol (Paris). 1967;59(4 Suppl):323-4.

[Comparison of the action of barbiturates and chloralose on the potentials of 
the dorsal root].

[Article in French]

Abdelmoumene M
 Besson JM.
PMID: 4305998 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The combined effects of chronic ethanol/desipramine treatment on β-adrenoceptor density and coupling efficiency in rat brain 1. Eur J Pharmacol. 1998 Dec 18;363(2-3):241-51. doi: 
10.1016/s0014-2999(98)00810-3.

The combined effects of chronic ethanol/desipramine treatment on 
beta-adrenoceptor density and coupling efficiency in rat brain.

Gurguis GN(1)
 Turkka J, Karanian J, Linnoila M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterans Affairs Medical Center, Dallas, TX 75216, USA.
gurguis.george@dallas.va.gov

Both ethanol and desipramine influence beta-adrenoceptor regulation.
We reported 
previously that ethanol partially counteracted desipramine's effects on 
beta-adrenoceptor.
Previous studies utilized beta-adrenoceptor radioligands that 
also bind to 5-HT1B receptors, thus, changes in 5-HT1B receptors could have 
confounded the results.
The effects of chronic ethanol, desipramine and 
ethanol/desipramine treatment on beta-adrenoceptor coupling efficiency to Gs 
protein in rat brain were examined using 125I-iodocyanopindolol after blocking 
binding to 5-HT1B receptors.
In the frontal cortex, ethanol uncoupled 
beta-adrenoceptor from GS.
Desipramine decreased beta-adrenoceptor density, 
particularly in the high-conformational state, with no effect on coupling.
In 
combined treatment, desipramine prevented ethanol-induced uncoupling.
In the 
hippocampus, desipramine enhanced beta-adrenoceptor coupling, but ethanol had no 
effect.
In combination with desipramine, ethanol enhanced desipramine-induced 
decrease in beta-adrenoceptor density in the high-conformational state, but 
uncoupled beta-adrenoceptors, an effect not observed with ethanol alone.
These 
results suggest a complex interplay between ethanol and antidepressants in 
modulating beta-adrenoceptor function.
DOI: 10.1016/s0014-2999(98)00810-3
PMID: 9881595 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Effects of cyclophosphamide and adriamycin on the healing of surgical wounds in mice 1. Cancer. 1975 Oct;36(4):1277-81. doi: 
10.1002/1097-0142(197510)36:4<1277::aid-cncr2820360413>3.0.co;2-1.

Effects of cyclophosphamide and adriamycin on the healing of surgical wounds in 
mice.

Cohen SC
 Gabelnick HL, Johnson RK, Goldin A.
Administration of therapeutic dose levels of cyclophosphamide as a single dose 
or as daily treatments for 5 days during the perisurgical period resulted in a 
significant decrease in the strength of surgical skin wounds in mice as measured 
21 days after surgery.
Administration of a single dose of 200 mg/kg either at 
the time of surgery or up to 4 days prior to or after surgery impaired 21-day 
wound strength, with the most extensive depression observed when the drug was 
given 1 or 2 days after surgery.
Earlier stages of wound healing (day 3 or day 
7) were not as sensitive to cyclophosphamide.
Adriamycin in the therapeutic 
dosage range for mice did not significantly impair wound healing.
This drug had 
an effect only at the LD10 dosage level.
Combination treatment with 
cyclophosphamide plus adriamycin at the time of surgery impaired 21-day wound 
strength to a greater degree than observed with either agent alone, but did not 
significantly depress wound strength 3 or 7 days after surgery.
These studies 
indicate that dosage level, the time of drug administration relative to surgery, 
and the time at which wound strength measurements are made are important 
parameters in determination of the effects of antineoplastic agents on wound 
healing.
DOI: 10.1002/1097-0142(197510)36:4<1277::aid-cncr2820360413>3.0.co;2-1
PMID: 1175126 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Biogenesis of mitochondria 1. Arch Biochem Biophys. 1970 Jan;136(1):54-64. doi:
10.1016/0003-9861(70)90326-7.

Biogenesis of mitochondria. 12. The effects of aminoglycoside antibiotics on the 
mitochondrial and cytoplasmic protein-synthesizing systems of Saccharomyces 
cerevisiae.

Davey PJ
 Haslam JM, Linnane AW.
DOI: 10.1016/0003-9861(70)90326-7
PMID: 4313769 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Protection from arabinofuranosylcytosine and n-mustard-induced myelotoxicity using hemoregulatory peptide pGlu-Glu-Asp-Cys-Lys monomer and dimer <jats:title>Abstract</jats:title>
               <jats:p>We have previously shown that the synthetic peptide pGlu-Glu-Asp-Cys- Lys (pEEDCK monomer) inhibits the cytostatic drug-induced proliferation of hematopoietic stem cells CFU-S. Keeping CFU-S quiescent by pEEDCK treatment renders them insensitive to cycle-specific cytostatic drugs and leads to reduced toxicity. Here we show that pEEDCK application during repeated (twice) administration of clinically relevant (nonlethal) 1-beta-D-arabinofuranosylcytosine (Ara-C) doses reduced the percentage of CFU-S in S-phase from 60%-70% to 25%-30% and led to a sustained stem cell number in the bone marrow (BM)
 whereas unprotected mice had lost about 75% of their CFU-S population.
Owing to its cysteine content, the pEEDCK monomer is easily oxidized.
The resulting dimer (pEEDCK)2 is a potent stimulator of hematopoiesis.
As we show, it can be used for postchemotherapy acceleration of hematologic recovery, similar to the use of recombinant hematopoietic growth factors.
A single injection of 30 micrograms/kg pEEDCK monomer to mice 2 hours before the second Ara-C injection retarded onset of neutropenia (by 2 to 3 days) and improved recovery after depression.
The quantitative degree of neutropenia was not changed.
Postchemotherapy (Ara-C administered twice, followed by N-mustard) infusion of the stimulatory (pEEDCK)2 dimer (1.4 micrograms/kg/d) produced a 4.6-fold increase of progenitor levels (6.7 CFU-GM/1,000 BM cells v 1.45 CFU-GM/1,000 in normal mice) 2 days after the end of the cytostatic treatment when CFU- GM were not detectable in unprotected mice.
This increase was followed after several days by strongly elevated granulocyte counts, which remained high for approximately 1 week.
Up to 75% of the peripheral leukocytes were mature polymorphonuclear leukocytes (PMN) during this phase.
Ara-C (twice) and monomer treatment as above followed by dimer infusion resulted in the complete protection of hematopoiesis.
Mice treated with the protective pEEDCK monomer plus stimulatory dimer did not develop the leukocyte depression noted in unprotected animals.
The inhibitory monomer appears to keep the stem cell population numerically and qualitatively intact, thus providing optimum target cell conditions for the subsequent stimulator (dimer) treatment.
Our results show that the hemoregulatory peptide monomer and dimer can be used for improving the hematologic status of mice treated with clinically relevant doses of cytostatic drugs (antimetabolite and alkylating, alone and in combination).
Combining both peptides can prevent occurrence of neutropenia completely.
Both peptides can be obtained easily by chemical synthesis and are also active on human cells.
They are thus highly promising candidates for application as multilevel hemoprotectors in cancer chemotherapy.</jats:p>
Hepatic Extraction of Indocyanine Green Is Depressed Early in Sepsis Despite Increased Hepatic Blood Flow and Cardiac Output 1. Arch Surg. 1991 Feb;126(2):219-24. doi: 10.1001/archsurg.1991.01410260109015.

Hepatic extraction of indocyanine green is depressed early in sepsis despite 
increased hepatic blood flow and cardiac output.

Wang P(1)
 Ba ZF, Chaudry IH.
Author information:
(1)Department of Surgery, Michigan State University, East Lansing 48824-1315.
Erratum in
    Arch Surg 1991 Sep;126(9):1093.
Although active hepatocellular function is depressed during sepsis, it is not 
known whether this occurs in the very early stages of sepsis and whether it is 
due to depressed cardiac output or hepatic blood flow.
To study this, rats were 
subjected to sepsis by cecal ligation and puncture and hepatocellular function 
was determined at various intervals thereafter by assessing the ability of the 
liver to clear different doses of indocyanine green.
The indocyanine green 
concentration was continuously measured in vivo with a fiberoptic catheter and 
an in vivo hemoreflectometer.
Maximal velocity and kinetic constant of the 
clearance of indocyanine green, hepatic blood flow, and cardiac output were 
determined in experimental and sham-operated rats.
The results demonstrate that 
hepatic blood flow and cardiac output increased 2 to 10 hours after cecal 
ligation and puncture, while hepatocellular function (maximum velocity and 
kinetic constant) was decreased even 2 hours following cecal ligation and 
puncture.
No linear correlation between hepatocellular function and hepatic 
blood flow or cardiac output was found under such conditions.
The extremely 
early depression in active hepatocellular function, despite the increased 
hepatic blood flow and cardiac output, may form the basis for cellular 
dysfunctions leading to multiple organ failure during sepsis.
DOI: 10.1001/archsurg.1991.01410260109015
PMID: 1992997 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
The testes after unilateral incarcerated inguinal hernia in prepubertal rats. 1. Turk J Pediatr. 1989 Oct-Dec;31(4):263-9.

The testes after unilateral incarcerated inguinal hernia in prepubertal rats.

Tanyel FC(1)
 Ayhan A, Büyükpamukçu N, Hiçsönmez A.
Author information:
(1)Department of Pediatric Surgery, Hacettepe University Faculty of Medicine, 
Ankara.
The ipsilateral and contralateral testes after unilateral incarcerated inguinal 
hernia were evaluated, and compared to the contralateral testis after unilateral 
testicular torsion in 30 prepubertal rats.
Control, torsion and detorsion at 24 
hours, and incarcerated inguinal hernia and reduction in the 24 hour groups, 
each consisting of ten rats were established.
The testes were harvested after 15 
days.
Mean seminiferous tubular diameters (MSTD) and mean testicular biopsy 
scores (MTBS) were determined and compared.
A decrease in MSTD and depression in 
MTBS, which was more prominent in the ipsilateral testes, were found in both 
ipsilateral and contralateral testes following unilateral incarcerated inguinal 
hernia.
The testicular damage encountered after unilateral incarcerated inguinal 
hernia was similar to the contralateral testicular damage following unilateral 
testicular torsion with the utilized parameters.
PMID: 2486425 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Alterations in graft--ersus-host reactivity and peripheral leukocytes in mice after erythropoietin treatment. 1. Exp Hematol. 1975 Aug;3(4):234-43.

Alterations in graft--ersus-host reactivity and peripheral leukocytes in mice 
after erythropoietin treatment.

Kinnamon KE
 Blackwell LH, Ledney GD.
Treatment of mice on four consecutive days with either erythropoietin (EP) or 
rabbit antimouse thymocyte serum (ATS) resulted in a significant reduction in 
antigenic reactivity of spleen cells as measured by the Simonsen assay.
In 
normal animals, treatment with either EP or ATS resulted in lymphopenia and in 
most instances a neutrophilia and a variable monocytopenia.
Similar alterations 
in these cell types were recorded for polycythemic mice subsequent to treatment 
with either EP or ATS.
These data plus histologic analyses support the idea that 
there is an inverse relationship between the cells committed to differentiate 
along the lymphoid cell line and the cells committed to differentiate along 
myeloid cell lines.
Further, the data are consistent with the "carrying 
capacity" concept regarding the stem cell microenvironment and support the 
monophyletic theory.
PMID: 240732 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Venlafaxine reverses decreased proliferation in the subventricular zone in a rat model of early life stress 1. Behav Brain Res. 2015 Oct 1;292:79-82. doi: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.05.059. Epub
2015  Jun 5.

Venlafaxine reverses decreased proliferation in the subventricular zone in a rat 
model of early life stress.

Martisova E(1)
 Aisa B(1), Tordera RM(1), Puerta E(1), Solas M(1), Ramirez 
MJ(2).
Author information:
(1)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Navarra, IdiSNA, 
Navarra Institute for Health Research, 31008 Pamplona, Spain.
(2)Department of Pharmacology and Toxicology, University of Navarra, IdiSNA, 
Navarra Institute for Health Research, 31008 Pamplona, Spain.
Electronic 
address: mariaja@unav.es.
It is believed that glucocorticoids control the proliferation of neural 
progenitor cells, and this process is highly involved in mood disorders and 
cognitive processes.
Using the maternal separation model of chronic neonatal 
stress, it has been found that stress induced depressive-like behavior, 
cognitive deficits and a decrease in proliferation in the subventricular zone 
(SVZ).
Venlafaxine reversed all deleterious effects of chronic stress by 
modulating HPA activity.
These outcomes suggest modulation of stress-mediated 
glucocorticoid secretion as a target for the treatment of mood disorders and 
neurodegenerative processes.
Copyright © 2015 Elsevier B.V. All rights reserved.
DOI: 10.1016/j.bbr.2015.05.059
PMID: 26051818 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Elevated guanosine 3?:5?-cyclic monophosphate mediates the depression of nitrovasodilator reactivity in endothelium-intact blood vessels 1. Naunyn Schmiedebergs Arch Pharmacol. 1991 Sep;344(3):345-50. doi: 
10.1007/BF00183010.

Elevated guanosine 3':5'-cyclic monophosphate mediates the depression of 
nitrovasodilator reactivity in endothelium-intact blood vessels.

Jackson WF(1)
 Busse R.

Author information:
(1)Department of Biological Sciences, Western Michigan University, Kalamazoo 
49008.
The influence of endothelium-derived nitric oxide (EDNO) on relaxation induced 
by the nitrovasodilators, sodium nitroprusside and sodium nitrite was assessed 
in phenylephrine-stimulated hamster thoracic aortas, a preparation that displays 
significant basal release of EDNO.
Removal of the endothelium or treatment with 
the NO synthase inhibitors, NG-nitro-L-arginine (L-NAG, 10-30 microM) or 
NG-methyl-L-arginine (L-NMMA; 100 microM) increased the potency and, except for 
sodium nitroprusside in endothelium-denuded segments, also increased the 
efficacy of the nitrovasodilators.
Removal of the endothelium had no effect on 
relaxations induced by isoproterenol, an indication that these effects were 
specific for the nitrovasodilators.
Removal of the endothelium, treatment of 
endothelium-intact preparations with L-NAG or L-NMMA, or exposure of these 
vessels to the guanylate cyclase inhibitor, methylene blue (10 microM) increased 
reactivity of the aortas to the guanosine 3':5'-cyclic monophosphate (cGMP) 
analogue, 8-Br cGMP.
Measurement of cGMP revealed that endothelium-intact 
segments had a 6.5 fold higher level of cGMP than endothelium-denuded 
preparations and that sodium nitroprusside increased cGMP in both preparations 
by similar amounts in a concentration-dependent fashion.
Exposure of 
endothelium-denuded or L-NAG-treated segments to sodium nitroprusside, to mimic 
the effects of basally released EDNO, depressed sodium nitrite and 8-Br cGMP 
reactivity in a manner similar to endothelium-intact segments.
These data 
indicate that EDNO increases cGMP levels in vascular smooth muscle and that the 
elevated cGMP levels depress nitrovasodilator and 8-Br cGMP reactivities.
DOI: 10.1007/BF00183010
PMID: 1660105 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Electrophysiological studies on benzodiazepine antagonists 1. Brain Res. 1984 Mar 19;295(2):265-74. doi: 10.1016/0006-8993(84)90975-2.

Electrophysiological studies on benzodiazepine antagonists.

Krespan B
 Springfield SA, Haas H, Geller HM.
The actions of the benzodiazepine (BDZ) antagonists 
3-hydroxymethyl-beta-carboline (3-HMC), Ro 14-7437 and Ro 15-1788 were tested on 
single cell activity of rat hypothalamic neurons in tissue cultures and on 
membrane properties of CA1 hippocampal pyramidal neurons in transverse slices.
In addition, we examined the interactions of some of these agents with 
inhibitions elicited by gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) as well as the ability of 
Ro 14-7437 to reverse the GABA-enhancing action of the BDZ agonist flurazepam.
BDZ antagonists did not alter patterns of spontaneous activity of hypothalamic 
neurons and did not affect resting membrane potential or membrane conductance in 
CA1 pyramidal cells.
Ro 14-7437 either partially or totally reversed the 
potentiation by flurazepam of GABA-elicited depression of hypothalamic neuronal 
activity.
Small and inconsistent actions on GABA-mediated inhibitions of 
hypothalamic neurons were noted.
Electrically-elicited inhibitions of 
hypothalamic neurons were either not altered or slightly reduced.
In the 
hippocampal slice, the frequency of spontaneous IPSPs, the amplitude of 
stratum-radiatum evoked IPSPs and the conductance increase caused by 
stratum-radiatum stimulation were either not altered or slightly reduced.
These 
findings demonstrate that non-convulsant BDZ antagonists block the action of BDZ 
agonists in facilitating GABA and further that the presence of a BDZ agonist is 
not required for these GABA-mediated events to occur.
However, these experiments 
do not exclude a modulatory role for an endogenous BDZ agonist on GABA-mediated 
events.
DOI: 10.1016/0006-8993(84)90975-2
PMID: 6424866 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
Protective effect of deferoxamine on chromium(VI)-induced DNA single-strand breaks
 cytotoxicity, and lipid peroxidation in primary cultures of rat hepatocytes 1.
Arch Toxicol.
1997;71(6):345-50. doi: 10.1007/s002040050397.
Protective effect of deferoxamine on chromium (VI)-induced DNA single-strand 
breaks, cytotoxicity, and lipid peroxidation in primary cultures of rat 
hepatocytes.
Susa N(1), Ueno S, Furukawa Y, Sugiyama M.

Author information:
(1)Department of Veterinary Public Health, School of Veterinary Medicine and 
Animals Sciences, Kitasato University, Aomori Japan.
Incubation of primary cultures of rat hepatocytes with K2CR2O7 and deferoxamine 
(DFO), an iron chelator, resulted in a marked decrease in cellular levels of DNA 
single-strand breaks caused by K2Cr2O7.
Cellular treatment with DFO also 
suppressed both dichromate-induced cytotoxicity--evaluated by the leakage of 
lactate dehydrogenase, and lipid peroxidation--as monitored by malondialdehyde 
formation.
In addition, treatment with DFO attenuated the suppression of the 
levels of vitamin E and C as well as the inhibition of alkaline phosphatase and 
glutathione peroxidase activity attributed to K2Cr2O7.
However, DFO had no 
influence on the cellular level of glutathione or the activity of glutathione 
reductase and superoxide dismutase suppressed by dichromate.
Under the same 
experimental conditions, cellular uptake and distribution of chromium were not 
affected by DFO.
These results indicate that DFO protects cells from chromium 
(VI)-induced DNA strand breaks, cytotoxicity, lipid peroxidation, vitamin E and 
C depression, and glutathione peroxidase inhibition The role of antioxidants in 
chromium (VI)-induced cytotoxicity, DNA breaks, and lipid peroxidation is 
discussed.
DOI: 10.1007/s002040050397
PMID: 9195015 [Indexed for MEDLINE]
